August, 1914. 8
Had a good night, was very tired, slept in the large 8 berth cabin with Hussey, Marston & Clark. Rather a scramble this morning getting up, no one could find anything. All rather dirty. We have to get everything for ourselves, etc. Sausages for breakfast. The very worst West country weather, blowing hard and drizzling rain. The ship was alongside Millay wharf when we went on board and she left there sharp at noon today with Sir Ernest on board. Just a very small crowd to see us off, but enthusiastic enough. Just before sailing I went ashore and bought 2 lbs. of dry biscuits and 2 yards of cheap calico for purposes of cheap calico for purposes of sea sickness.
Sir Ernest slept at Duke of Cornwall's Hotel, he offered me a bed there very kindly, but I declined as I thought it best to get into the routine as quickly as possible. Before we get outside Plymouth breakwater, Sir Ernest left the ship in a picket boat lent him by the Commander in Chief. He returned to London, I suppose, meanwhile we proceeded to Cawsand(?) Bay where we have anchored for the night as we are not quite ready to go to sea yet. I understand that there are one or two things to be done to the anchors, etc. This only suspends the agony for agony. I know there is going to be for me for the weather outside is apparently very rough. It is blowing a gale, cold & misty. How am I going to get all the way to the Antarctic in this tiny ship I don't know. I expect I shall die of exhaustion long before I get to Buenos Ayres. It is bad enough in a battle ship but in this minute thing I must die. I am beginning to funk it as usual & wish I had not come. I don't see the use of Polar exploration at all.
There is still time to get ashore, I am half inclined to seize the opportunity & go. We have had a small torpedo boat cruising round us all day & her captain came aboard to see ours.
There are signs of war all round. The boom is out across the entrance to the Hamoaze (?) (naval harbor) & battleships keep steaming in & out and searchlights at night. We are to leave here at 3 a.m. in the morning. Very tired and homesick.
August, 1914. 10 & 14.
10th: Very seasick and homesick. Ship does everything but sink which is the only thing I pray for, to put me out of my misery, unless a large German battleship comes along and rescues us. It was suicidal of me to come along on the mad jaunt.
14th: Still feel a little funny but quite able to do work. I signed on the ship's books as Motor Mechanic and my official pay is one shilling a month, but that is only technical, of course, for out of that one would have to pay 1/4 insurance tax! We have been sailing only all day on a starboard tack in a N.W. direction. Am eating better but sparingly. It got quite calm in the afternoon so I went down into the hold and restored a lot of our shore party gear. Day's run only 52 miles to the good.
August, 1914. 16.
A nice, fine day. We are still sailing only with a good, big swell. We are somewhere in the Bay and it is behaving itself unusually well. If we get nothing worse than this, I have nothing to fear. We had a short service today; I read prayers and we sang a couple of hymns. We have to do all our own work in our cabins and in cabins with 3 in it we are taking it in weekly turns to keep it clean; keep the wash-stand supplied with water, etc. There are also the outside passages to keep clean and we are taking this interns. It is my turn in the cabin this week.
One of our best men, Tom Crean, who was the Capt. Scott, and got the Albert Medal for saving Commanders Evans's life, fell down an broke his wrist the other day on board and is laid up with it. Minor accidents are frequent. I had a very narrow shave this morning from getting my head bashed in. We were all pulling a halyard, and someone was singing a chantey, when the rope broke and the block came down very forcibly and just grazed my face. But a miss is as good as a mile every time. Slept all afternoon.
August, 1914. 19 & September, 1914. 5.
19th: A fine hot day. We are now living exclusively on tinned food having quite exhausted our supply of fresh meat, which we have been able to keep until now in our refrigerator. It was so calm today that we have now got up steam or else we never should get to Madeira at all as we have only been doing about 80 miles a day or 3 1/2 miles an hour! We took another sounding today 1970 fathoms, 2 1/2 miles and lost the whole of the wire. I finished off the motorboat engine.
5th: Weather and too many dogs to look after and sledging gear to get ready. We do look forward to getting down to the ice so at least Marston and I do. We were out talking about it today. There are some very unrefined people in the ship as officers, men who have risen from sailors and although they are fine men in their way and reliable at their work their ideas with regard to propriety are so different to ours that it really is a little trying and their language at meals is a bit too strong, accustomed as I am to hearing expletives.
At noon we passed St. Vincent Island, Cape Verde Is. passing about 100 yds. off the mouth of the harbour and I achieved my project of sending you a postcard in a bottle. I threw it out to a fishing boat who picked it up, but whether they post it or not remains to be seen, if they do it will be unique, because it is the only sort of communication we had there and it was sent from a ship which had been a week at sea and it was only a chance that we happened to pass so close. It cheered me up a lot to see, them pick up the bottle. Please let me know whether you get the card. It is a picture of a Madeira sledge with oxen, back written in red ink and front in black ink. I am afraid I shall not hear whether you got this card or not until we have actually completed our sledge journey (December 1915) unless you happen to mention it specially in one of your letters to B.A. I know that it is impossible for me to get an answer to anything now that I may write about until Dec. 1915.
September, 1914. 7.
A very rough day - a short confused sea, ship pitching and rolling very quickly in every direction. It has affected me very slightly, giving me a slight headache and loss of appetite, nothing else, but I think it shows that a huge sea would affect me after a good deal of calm weather. My health on this trip had been a matter of continual interest and surprise to me, which accounts for my writing so much about it. Your will understand though that this is a purely personal diary.
I think when I get down to the ice I shall keep a somewhat similar record, as it may come in handy for book writing and lecturing later on and I will send it to you before I come home if there is the opportunity to do so. This however will be the last piece of writing you will get from me for quite a long time, except a letter from the Falkland Islands, but of course I shall always seize any opportunity to communicate with you if there is one, but it is quite certain that once we land on the ice and the ship has left there will be no chance of communicating with you for at least 9 months. We expect to land on the ice about Xmas day 1914. The ship would leave Jany - Feby then return to B.A. or New Zealand and post our letters then she will return for us about Xmas 1915 and take us off about March 1916 so you will hear nothing from June 1915 until April 1916 and we shall be home about two months later.
After closing my diary last night a strong wind suddenly sprang up and within a minute or so of writing the last word I was up at the top of the mast loosing the top gallant sail. It is rather a curious sensation being aloft up in the pitch dark with the ship rolling and pitching.
October, 1914. 14.
Very heavy & extra dirty work getting out the last of the cargo, we get absolutely black with coal dust, but are beginning to make a really good "stow" of it & are gaining room to get in the extra gear. The weather turned colder in the morning. About 2 p.m. we had to hurriedly lower & man the whale boat & go to the rescue of the motor boat which was on its way back from La Negra with the officers and was leaking water to such an extent that it stopped the engine working. We got her in tow only just in time & trans-shipped some of the luggage & the chief engineer; she was very low in the water & would soon have sunk. We had a hard pull against a rapidly increasing headwind and by the time we got back to the ship the wind had increased to hurricane force bringing with it a dust storm so thick that one could only see a few yards. It was intensely unpleasant as our eyes & hair became cringed up with dust in a very few minutes & we had to work through it to hoist the two boats. By the time we had finished we were all thickly coated with dust & the ship was full of it. I have never seen anything like it before. It lasted about 3 hours & then turned to rain.
We are taking it in turn to go out to the lighter in pairs for 24 hours each and look after the dogs; as Hussey went out this morning I borrowed his banjo and deputized for him at the concert. I played rottenly but was treated royally. They gave us a nice tea afterwards.
There is a fine billiard room attached to the mission and a good reading room and they run it as a sort of Christian club. It must be very nice for decent minded sailor men(and there are a few) to have a nice place like this to go to, so very homely and cheerful. There is also a sailors home where we are to be entertained to a supper on Monday next. We expect Sir Ernest to arrive about Friday next.
The crew, or at least 10 out of the 12 are behaving most disloyally, going out every day on the drink and leaving us, the staff, to do all the work. This show something wrong somewhere, but it will all be put right when Sir Ernest arrives, thank goodness.
October, 1914. 19.
Another hard day's work, nominally in charge of dogs for the day but had to turn to and get the motor sledges out of their cases on board the lighter; one of the cases is about the size of a [ ] and it took several hours work to break it open without damaging the wood. The case alone cost 7.10.0 sterling and it was so large that one side of it was used to make a new deck extending from the roof of the wardroom to the quarter deck as to have more room for the dogs. There are four other enormous cases containing motor sledges or parts of them, propeller, etc., but I expect I shall be able to unpack some of them before getting them on board. We are getting the kennels on board by degrees but it is awkward and difficult work.
We were all invited to a representative luncheon today given by the English Colony here, but Sir Ernest could not let us go as there is still so much work to be done. We are also invited to a sing-song on board S.S. Uruguay tonight. They are all going except myself as I have to stay with the dogs, thank goodness, but I got someone else to look out for me from 7 to 8:30 p.m. and went and dined with Rev. Brady and Mr. Mackie, the British Consul General, just a simple dinner in Mr. Brady's flat. Everyone here lives in flats and there are some very fine blocks of flats. They call them Departments.
November, 1914. 4.
Last night we had a short smoking concert in our cabin everyone was present. Sir Ernest, Mr. Wild, Martson (the artist), Hurley (cinematographer), Tom Crean, the sailor who was with Scott, Dr. McIllroy, Dr. Macklin, Clark (biologist), Wordie (geologist), James (physicist), Hussey (meteorologist), and myself comprising the shore party and Captain Worsley, Lts. Hudson and Greenstreet R.N.R. the ships officers. Marston and Wild who were both on Shackleton's last expedition, were the principal vocal contributors to the program. Hussey played the banjo as accompanist which he does beautifully and I the Ocarina - vilely.
Today I spent the whole morning in the coal bunkers with Wild, the chief engineer and two others, "trimming" the coal - shifting it along to the stoke hold door. This afternoon I had a good bath and did my washing at the same time, 1 shirt, 1 pair socks, 5 handkerchiefs, 1 pillow slip, 4 hand towels, and 1 bath ditto. The bath ditto is a job to was. I would willingly give a laundry 6d to do it. I must admit washer-women early their money except perhaps in Buenos Aires where I was charged 1/6 for the following: 2 white shirts, 1 pr white trousers, 2 singlets, 4 collars, 2 soft collars and 3 pair socks; which gives you an idea of the prices of things in B.A.
We have done 186 miles today. We quite expected to have done more as we have all sail set. We now have only 150 to go to South Georgia, however, and shall be in by noon tomorrow at the latest.
We had a fearful scrum at dinner today; a big roll sent about five of us flying into the middle of the room with plates, mugs, etc., such a mess, but I was not among the scrimmage this time, merely an amused spectator.
We have already met a good many penguins swimming about and there are always several Albatross, blue-petrels, whale-birds and Cape-pigeon-petrels accompanying us; we have seen a good many whales too.
December, 1914. 5.
We have been ready to leave South Georgia for the last week but Sir Ernest has been waiting for the arrival of a steamer - the "Harpoon" - from B.A. which would bring us our last news of the war, etc. As she had not arrived by today, Sir E. decided to lear forthwith and at 9 a.m. we set sail for the Antarctic, the goal of my life's ambitions. Shortly before sailing two little live pigs arrived on board and were accommodated with a neat little pen.
What thoughts are our, setting out thus at such a time, with no chance of news from dear ones at home who are passing through the greatest national crisis of modern times.
What may we expect to learn on our return. The map of Europe may be greatly altered but God grant that England may stand where she is this day and that all those dear to me may be spared from any privations or sufferings.
It is a fine day and the sea is not very rough though I have been sea sick three times, but I have learned to take it philosophically and it will soon be over.
We passed our first iceberg - a beauty about noon. This is the first real large berg I have ever seen.
The sea got rougher in the afternoon and I got worse.
The upper deck is heavily encumbered with coal; there is coal everywhere and at present it completely blocks the main deck between the cabins and the wardroom.
December, 1914. 25.
Xmas day at last, and spent under conditions so different from any Xmas I have ever spent before, but under conditions which it has been almost a lifelong ambition to experience.
When I look back it seems strange that I should be here at all, for I had no previous Antarctic experience and apparently but little to recommend me when I first applied to Sir Ernest, and I am quite aware that there must have been hundreds of more competent motor-mechanics than myself. I often wonder, even now, whether I come up to all Sir Ernest's requirements.
I certainly, unintentionally, incurred his displeasure a few days ago, by, as he put it, exceeding my duty.
The sailors had been hinting that they did not get their fair share of little luxuries, such as sauces, etc., for by their agreement they are on the same rations as we are. I had always taken scrupulous care to see that they did get fair treatment, and recently Sir Ernest ordered me to give them one quarter of the contents of every case of delicacies I opened. The next day I opened a case of 24 bottles of Heinz's chutney, gave the bo'sun 1/2 doz. and asked him to initial the receipt of them in my issue book, or rather I gave the articles to another man and told him to tell the bo'sun this.
This man told the bo'sun that I wanted him to write out a receipt for the goods.
This seemed to hurt his feelings and he complained to the chief officer and by the time it reached Sir Ernest it was said that I wanted each man to sign for each course of his dinner every day, or some exaggeration of that sort. This was unfortunate be I did not think it worth wasting Sir Ernest's time with useless explanations, especially as he was very nice about it, but he said that it was contrary to the spirit of the expedition and of the merchant service, but I could see that he was displeased and that he considered that I had made a blunder.
It seems such a trifle, yet I would have given a lot for it not to have occurred.
Of course I cannot get out of "service" ways. In the "service" it would have been far more serious to have omitted to have obtained a receipt.
Thus do we sometimes err in striving to do right.
But Xmas, Ah Xmas so full of thoughts for those so far away, but to know so well that most of them at this very moment are thinking of and talking about one brings lumps of consolation to one's throat.
Are they happy, I ask myself over and over again, do they suffer by this damnably conceived war, of if they only knew how well and happy I am, in spite of bottles of chutney and bo'suns and receipts! But these are riddles which will not be solved 'ere another Xmas has passed and more, another six months or so as well, then all will once more be reunited.
I drink to the day then, true any beverage is only raspberry vinegar which our kind Norwegians friends gave us at South Georgia and which Sir Ernest and I and one or two others have substituted for whiskey this festive day, but Sir Ernest is splendid where intoxicants are concerned, he gauges exactly how much is suitable to the occasion - necessary to satisfy without permitting of unreasonable and objectionable indulgence, and he permits to be issued just so much and no more, hence we have general satisfaction without those regrettable debauches that do so much to mar the solemnity of the celebration and the measure of the general enjoyment of the whole party.
The little girls were greatly appreciated this morning and were genuine surprises as I contrived to conceal them under the colored Japanese paper napkins with which I decorated the breakfast tables.
For breakfast we simply had tinned herrings in tomato sauce, followed by honey. For dinner we really had a terrific "blow-out," Tinned Turtle Soup, Tinned Whitebait, Tinned Jugged Hare, Plum pudding with lots of brandy on it (called Teetotalers Delight), Brazil nuts. Altogether a glorious feed and I feel pleasantly painfully replete; but the clearing up - laying table with real starched napkins, folded bishop's mitre pattern, involved a lot of extra work. Unfortunately we had no crackers! nor could make any.
My wheel this morning was pleasant enough and we got heaps of open water with very few ice-isthmi and made splendid progress again - 71 miles in the 24 hrs. and are now in Lat. 65, 42 close on the Antarctic circle, but since noon we have very conveniently been jambed up against impenetrable ice, waiting for it to open out but are now just getting a move on.
The saloon windows I am writing by are all covered with most beautiful ice-ferns. It is cold at night now, often below freezing.
December, 1914. 31. New Year's Eve
It has been mostly a dull overcast day with a chilly Northerly wind blowing and snow squalls in the afternoon which I spent below for "our annual stock-taking," so as to arrive at some idea as to exactly how much provisions. Such an easy date to remember.
My thoughts this evening are again very much with those at home. The war causes us some anxiety, though I do not think that anything worse than a rise in the price of foods can affect non-combatants, but that would be bad enough if the rise was a serious one.
We have had much trouble with the ice this morning. During practically the whole of my watch this morning we were jammed in between two converging floes. Probably these floes were drifting along and each of them rotating towards each other and grinding their adjacent edges together, or it may have been that a drifting iceberg was pushing one of them against the other; anyhow we got tightly nipped and could not extricate ourselves for a long time. Immediately after we did get clear, the "dock" we had made closed with almost a snap and the sides of it crumpled up into pressure ice, showing clearly what great pressure there must have been on the ship! Sir Ernest seemed quite relieved when he saw what we had got clear of, though he did not exhibit any undue apprehensiveness at the time.
Whilst we were stuck fast an Emperor penguin appeared on the scene only to appear later on the table, thanks to Lt. Hudson's Munchausian exploits as a penguin lurer. Later a whole troupe of young Adelie penguins came up to look at us; some discussion took place amongst them as to what the ship really was. This developed into an altercation and ended in a fight, meanwhile a stalking party was already heading off the combatants, but just when it seemed certain that the whole troupe were as good as cooked, they took alarm and to their heels, tobogganing off in all directions, with the result that the four explorers baffled three only of the troop, two again falling to the large but deft hands of our worthy navigator!
January, 1915. 6.
(skips a page)...The difficulty was enhanced by the danger, we were all in of the ice at the bottom of and around the pool giving way and immersing us all. I ended up holding lying on my back on the edge of the pool, holding back another dog - Samson - with my left hand, pulling Sailor's left hind leg with my right hand, pushing my left foot in Satan's mouth to make him leave go and with Clark whacking me hard on the knee with a long bamboo. I think everyone was pretty much the same, but one hasn't time to take note of details in these "scraps." They are always so sudden and strenuous. Someone, Marston, I think, however, had hold of Sailor's tail and was pulling for all he was worth and how the tail and the ear stood the strain is a puzzle, for there were comparatively little damage done when we chained the culprits up and examined them.
After this we took a sounding, 2400 fathoms. We take turns at winding the winch doing about 200 fathoms (1200 feet) each. Owing to the heavy weight on the end of the wire, this is rather tiring work and it takes about half an hour per thousand fathoms at the quickest.
Heaving seen a seal on an adjacent floe the Captain and I set off in a boat (the Norwegian pram) to capture it. I took a revolver with me. We soon found our victim and, at about three yards only I fired for his brain, making no apparent effect, as he reared up rather menacingly; so I gave him another bullet, he then turned and made for the water, and fearing we should lose him I gave him the remaining bullets, but even then he took very little notice of them, though we know he was wounded by a slight blood stain on the floe. As he seemed to lie quietly we left him to attend to his wife who was lying at a respectful distance from him. As I had no more ammunition on me, we stunned her by a blow with an oar and then cut her throat with a blunt knife, a proceeding she protested against by snapping vigorously and one had to dodge her sharp teeth. It was a disgusting piece of butchery, but we need the meat and it is immaterial how we get it so long as we do not inflict, willfully, unnecessary torture. Meanwhile Mr. Crabeater had died of a broken heart, for when I cut him up and skinned him in the afternoon I found that a shot had penetrated his heart. This was probably the one which I aimed at his brain! The accuracy of the aim matters but little, however, so long as a vital part is hit!! Our work then commenced for we had to pull the two seals about 100 yards to the edge of the floe over some very hummocky ice, and as the male weighed about 300 lbs. it was as much as we could do, for we are all very much out of training through lack of proper exercise. At the edge of the floe we made the seals fast to the two ends of a line which we passed over the gunwales of the boat. To our surprise the male sank, but only with a very slight negative buoyancy so that the rope prevented him from sinking altogether. In this way we towed them both back to the ship where we were received with strains of "See the conquering hero comes" and good-humoured derisive cheers and one or two ribald remarks from members who had watch the sanguinary proceedings with binoculars.
On our way back I heard a curious blowing sound and at first thought it was one of our poor victims showing signs of returning animation, but on its being repeated we saw only about 50 yards off the fin of a whale just disappearing, and fearing it might be one of the dangerous killer whales, who will swallow a seal or a man whole or scrunch up a small boat, we considered discretion the better part of valour and as he appeared to be making directly for us, we prepared to propitiate him by casting off the seals and rowed close along the edge of the ice so as to be ready to jump on to it if he came alongside. Of course it may have been only an inoffensive blue whale or humpback but Sir Ernest who was watching us all the time said we were quite right to take the precautions we did as he was not at all sure that it was not a "killer".
January, 1915. 10.
We nearly always seem to pass at least one berg each day of exceptional beauty and today we passed a fine one... Its peculiarity exists in the several sharp pinnacles and its undulating surface. I wish I could draw. There are unrivaled opportunities for an artist. Our artist, Marston, paints nicely but either he has done all he wants to or else what seems to me to be worthy "subjects" are not really so, for the spirit seldom moves him to exercise his art. He is, however, a first class bootmaker and perhaps that it what really matters most after all.
The pigs trouble me a good deal. They live just outside the wardroom door and they occasionally get out of their pen and make a mess about the place. Still they are growing like anything and will be most acceptable when the time comes. It must come before the winter for they could never stand the climate. The little one is now as big as the big one was when the little one came and the big one is getting on for twice as big as he was when he arrived and is almost half grown. Puzzle: how little was the little one when he came?
Opposite the pigs are 5 puppies and their mother, the "interesting event" having taken place three days ago, but so far Tom Crean, who has cared for her like a hospital orderly is the only one who has seen the little creatures though we all hear their shrill little squeaks. They will soon be fun. One would think that with seventy dogs aboard, and all living directly above the cabins the ship would be unbearable, and we fully expected it to be so and dreaded their advent accordingly, but it is not so at all.
This is partly due to the cold climate arresting any decomposition and partly due to the thorough manner in which their excreta is dealt with. One of us goes round, about every two hours, with a shovel and a squeegee and so the decks are always more or less clean. The shovel is suspended over the stern by a rope and is automatically cleaned by the water splashing against it.
We do not find this job at all unpleasant, far less so than having to scrub places where people expectorate, but since leaving South Georgia I have hardly done it at all as I am on special duty as messman.
I think it is quite probable that the ship will return to winter at Buenos Aires or at South Georgia and I am therefore writing a few letters home and also making a precis of this diary. I do so wish sometimes I could just pop home for an hour or two as easily in the flesh as in spirit. No doubt the explorers of 2015, if there is anything left to explore, will not only carry their pocket wireless telephones fitted with wireless telescopes but will also receive their nourishment and warmth by wireless means and also their power to drive their motor sledges, but, of course, there will be an aerial daily excursion to both poles then, and I suppose it will be the bottom of the Atlantic, if not the center of the earth, that will form the goal in those days.
We "live" well, but perhaps it is that hunger is the best condiment. Even the fact that our seals and penguins are full of internal parasites of the nastiest and most loathsome kind does not deter us. We have nothing else to eat and so we have first got to put squeamishness aside and eat them. I never thought I could bring myself to do such things so easily. Often there is such a run on certain dishes, that there is nothing left for the messman and then I quite cheerfully eat up scraps from other peoples plates, without the shadow of a wince, though I am usually very discriminating as to whose leavings I have, avoiding those off the plates of certain people.
January, 1915. 24.
A most beautiful warm dry sunny Sunday. Most of us took the opportunity to air our sleeping bags, turning them inside out and hanging them over the broom in the sunshine.
Last night after I had finished wiring we espied a seal behind a hummock on the floe about 150 yards from the ship.
As we need all the fresh meat we can get and as we are not likely to have many seals at this spot so far from open water Mr. Wild shot it from the deck with a rifle - a very good shot, through the heart, and I was sent off on skis with a life line round me to take out a rope and secure it to the seal so that the others on board could pull it in.
After much stumbling and cautious circumambulation to avoid weak and slushy depressions in the floe, I accomplished my errand and holding on to the line I was pulled, still stumbling, over the small hummocks, toward the ship. About half way, the seal's weight broke through a spot that I had just managed to avoid and we nearly lost her as she began to sink, but by taking off my skis, making a bridge over the hole with one and a lever of the other I managed to get her head up sufficiently to enable us to pull her on board, A very large old female.
It is not for me to say it but one cannot fail to perceive that we are in a position of considerable disadvantage, though, I should say of very little peril unless the whole field of ice of which we seem to form the centre should subsequently be subjected to considerable pressure; even then it is expected that the ship would rise so that the ice would pass downwards under her bottom. When we got in here first we were merely in a pool in an area of loose pack ice. The recent gale caused this to congeal into one great field of ice without a rift or lead to be seen anywhere as far as the eye can see from the mast-head. No doubt it will open up, as it always has for us and most previous ships, in a week or two, but if this should not occur before the end of March, we should have to remain frozen in until next November probably, which would rather be rather trying.
No one contemplates, for moment that this is at all likely and Sir Ernest, least of all, exhibits the slightest sigh of anxiety about it. In any case we have ample provisions though not too much coal.
The temperature is about 19 degrees Farh., but it is so dry that it does not feel unpleasantly cold.
January, 1915. 29.
A dull but mild, dead calm day. The temperature went down to 9 degrees only in the night but it feels more like 40 degrees in the open air. Sensibility to cold is largely influenced by wind, humidity of the air and ones personal fitness. Unfortunately I have had several touches of sciatica varying in intensity. They commence immediately subsequent to my being thrown over the steering wheel and I think therefore that I must have fallen on the spot that overlies the origin of the sciatic nerve which is in the lumbar vertebrae. It may be only a coincidence but it looks very much as if it is due to traumatic causes again, for when I had it before it came on immediately after several falls from trees and from the roof at our house - The Priory, Hardway.
The doctor has given me certain tabloids and these seem to have benefitted me. I do hope it won't prejudice me in anyway.
We spent the morning getting cases of dog biscuits from the hold. This gave me a god deal of restowing to do which occupied me most of the afternoon after which I took a sounding (449 fathoms) with Hudson, he had rather hard work winding in 2694 feet of wire with a 10 lb. weight and a grate (?) on it.
We are still stuck solid in the floe. This has happened to previous explorers in this region - Weddell Sea - to both Bruce and Filchner. The former just managed to escape quite late in the season, but he was much further north - off Coats Land. Filchner got stuck about 200 miles north of us but in nine months drifted nearly 600 miles north and was then able to reach South Georgia. It certainly seems not improbable that we may remain in the ice field in which we are now incarcerated. If this be the case we shall almost certainly drift north emerging about this time next year near South Georgia. Sir Ernest says he will not return to England except via the Pole and Ross Sea, but one fails to see how he can get to land in the early part of next summer, if the ship is drifting all the time. Even now it would be a matter of very great difficulty to sledge any gear for twenty miles over this hummock ice and over stretches of open water which probably intervene between us and the land, and it would be out of the question to get the hut and all our provisions ashore, some fifty tons of gear at a minimum, taking fuel and dog food into consideration.
To transport the motors over this surface would be impossible. The surface is precisely owing to the entire absence of seals on which we had mainly relied. Naturally, on finding that the ice is closing up all round them the seals make for the edge of the ice floe water, for no seal could walk a distance of more than a mile or two. We think that the flocks of seals we saw in the water must have been migrating instinctively northward. If we can secure no more seals it will certainly mean destroying about half the dogs for about 2 1/2 months only, in addition we have enough compressed dog sledging pemmican for all the dogs for about 3 months. We certainly have not enough food for ourselves to spare any for the dogs.
I think we have sufficient food for ourselves to last all hands comfortably for twelve months, but as we had relied upon penguins and seal to eke out our larder, and there are none; we shall have to exercise reasonable care.
It seems such irony that we should have seen such myriads of seals so recently. I did venture to suggest once or twice that we ought to lay in a small store of them, as we had none left, but other considerations over ruled this. One must, however, be thankful for the splendid saving that has already been effected by the almost continual use of seal and penguin meat since leaving South Georgia. Tinned meat three times a day soon makes big holes in my stores, besides fresh meats are of the greatest value as anti-scorbutics (scurvey preventatives). I do hope that we shall be able to get a few seal and penguins soon whether we land or remain frozen in.
I have been skiing a good deal out on the floe, but it is almost impossible to get anything of a run, especially as I have no sticks. The ice sticking up her and there amongst the snow causes the skies to slip about in every direction when one comes into contact with it.
February, 1915. 9.
Last night we played the simple game of "questions," answering "Yes" or "No." We each had a turn as "guesser." The subjects were all rather difficult ones, such as the first pip in the apple Eve gave Adam, the hilt of Nelson's sword on the Nelson column, the first gold coin staked at the baccarat table at Monte Carlo in 1914.
Sir Ernest had to guess the left eye of the snake who tempted Eve and I had the dorsal fin of the second fish in the miracle of the five loaves and three small fishes. It is a simple game but provided the conundrums set are sufficiently exacting it becomes really interesting and educative. It passed the two hours after tea pleasantly enough and I hope we shall have more of it during the long winter, now approaching.
We all guessed our tasks eventually.
During the game, in response to a cry, we all ran up on deck just in time to see and hear a number of seals break through the thin ice of the frozen pool in which we lie to "blow" i.e. to recuperate themselves with fresh air after what, to judge from their apparent distress, must have been a long journey under the ice and before proceeding on another long spell to open water.
Today we made a desperate effort to get the ship free from this wretched floe.
Owing to the temperature having been below zero a good deal lately the pool in which we were lying is now all frozen over. In the morning some cracks opened up leading towards some open water, but before we got steam up the crack had closed again, and, as Sir Ernest said, it is better to be in an open pool than a closing crack, for that means pressure, the greatest peril that a polar ship has to face.
As it was we took nearly two hours turning the ship around, as the young ice in the pool is very tough and the pool is not more than twice as wide as the ship is long. It is hard times getting thwarted again just when things were beginning to improve. Sir Ernest accepts the inevitable with his customary inscrutable composure. One wonders what he really does think with so much anxiety concealed beneath so clam an exterior.
This evening a particularly fine specimen of an emperor penguin came up alongside we secured it. Hurley subsequently took a colour photograph of it.
I overate myself slightly at tea and indigested something so retired early but it was tomorrow before I slept.
February, 1915. 16.
A glorious bright day but exceedingly cold. I did quite a lot of washing last night, including my heavy sweater and repairing the numerous holes, etc. in the washed underclothing fully occupied my morning. In the afternoon I had a good deal to do in the hotel searching for some wholemeal flour - as Sir Ernest has ordered brown bread. It is not universally popular, strange to say, but there is no question about its being more beneficial to one's health than white bread. The cat occasionally gets shut in the hold and I have been blaming her lately and chiding her in consequence for a suspicious effluvia which has lately pervaded the whole hold. Today I opened a case of dry fish and the overpowering sting of the contents was positively annihilating and entirely accountable for recent odours. I hardly know how to adequately convey my apologies to the cat, but I think perhaps some of the fish will be an equable compensation. Poor Pussy. I am assured that it - the fish - is edible and even wholesome, but in its uncooked stage it is so unappetizing that I will gladly forego my share to provide the feline compensation.
At 4 p.m. we had a grand cinema football match with two full teams of eleven a side. Hurley, who never plays games, was busy with his cinematograph and cameras all the time and pictures promise to be interesting, showing one phase of our strange existence, our recreation as we all played with much vigour. Some of the members had leveled the ground down a bit in the morning and it was far superior to the deep snow surfaces that we have hitherto been playing on. The game was really interesting and we had a much needed and capable referee in Dr. Macklin, who, though one of our best players was unable to play owing to having been bitten rather badly by one of the dogs this morning whilst separating two combatants.
The temperature was about +5 degrees and we all commenced play in warm jerseys, caps, etc., but very soon one began to take off first a coat then a hat and so on until I, myself, had nothing on but a very thin short-sleeved summer vest ("Irish Linen mesh" make). I do not mention this as a sample of personal hardiness but merely to show that the Antarctic summer is not so formidable as some suppose, as the cold is certainly "dry cold" like it is in Switzerland.
February, 1915. 19
Today marks a step in my career. Was it ever so?
The cook has succumbed, appropriately enough, to housemaid's knee, and Sir Ernest, having too credulously heeded my infernal swanking on culinary matters has paid me the compliment of appointing me cook during the indisposition of Mr. Green. Thus it came to pass: Someone: "Oh Colonel (that's me) the Boss (that's Sir E.) wants to see you.
Me: (soliloq.) "What asinine thing have I done in the last 24 hrs.
I proceed with desultory knock kneedness to the boss's cabin, rapidly renewing my lurid past and inventing plausible excuses for all recent indiscretions. On arrival I stumble over the threshold of the door and make a clumsy entrance followed by an awkward announcement. Sir E. hates clumsiness and is liable to be adversely prejudiced thereby but as he is washing his hands and has his back to me he fails to perceive my approach. Instead of the expected reprimand he merely says, "You can cook, can't you, Lees." "No, I can't," I gurgle inarticulately to myself, but he mistakes my confusion for a bashful affirmative and my fate is sealed.
Oh why, oh why did I let my lying tongue run riot. Could I ever have seen such a combination of circumstances as this.
If i ever did really boost that I could cook I merely meant that, provided I had a tin opener and a toasting fork I could prepare such dishes as cold ox tongue or even a made up French savory like sardines on toast, -- camp cookery for one or two people, but that I could cook a three course dinner for a whole ships company of 28 men -- no I never said I could do that and moreover I can't and won't do it. I'll either starve them or poison them. It's a gross miscarriage of selection that I should be placed in this ridiculous position. I'm not afraid of the amount of work, I'm merely aware of my incompetence and ashamed of my indiscreet uttering. I'm not sure that it's not all a deep laid snare to show me up, as I now see, I well deserve to be.
I write this immediately after the edict has gone forth, for God knows, I am in such a state of agonized anticipation that I may not live through this day to record my sentiments at the end thereof.
I write my eyes full of tears and my heart full of fears, and dolefully proceed to the galley (how like gallows) the place where they cook, and I don't.
9 p.m. Later. Enough for the diaries! the evil thereof. The galley is small place; not enough room to swing a cat in, at least I could not swing that feline there very far as she was the first creature I met there. I vented my despair before her in trying the experiment. Soon the sick cook appeared.
I opine that the varlet malingers, but the doctor thinks otherwise. Is it conceivable that a doctor could connive a cook to bring about my downfall, but the fact that the cook has been going the doctor boiling water these last few days is more circumstantial than extenuating.
The cook and the cheek to smile at me and the impertinence to put his filthy little chef's cap on my head, simultaneously insulting me by some patronising compliment about my appropriate appearance, he assaults me with a floury hand and a rolling pin. I dismiss the knight, ordering him below.
He affects to ignore my dismissal and lingers as well as malingers, but now he shows me what preparations he has made for the day's cooking. Soup stock already on the boil, stewed seal meat already stewing - looks nasty and smells worse, an embryonic bread and butter pudding - just the bread and butter cut up into dice and put in a baking tin, and that's all.
I will do him the justice to say that he gave me every assistance and some much needed advice and a couple of stale scones to eat before he stumbled down the narrow staircase to the fo'c'sle and his bunk.
In great desperation and yearning to share my troubles with anyone I find Blackborrow - our stowaway who is now acting as pantry boy and is really a most excellent and competent young fellow. I soon find that he knows quite a lot about cooking, I confide in him that I know nothing and that I rely upon him to pull me through. He'll have a good deal  of pulling to do I'm thinking.
Sir E. has a very high opinion of him, in fact, he considers him the best man of the whole crew. It says much for his bona fides when a stowaway rises so high in the estimation of our leader for there is always a very natural prejudice against a stowaway.
Now my cooking - I taste the soup, all good cooks do thus, so there can be nothing wrong in a bad on doing so, it tastes insipid, heaven knows what it is made of, but how to rectify its insipidity is a puzzle. After some consideration a sudden rush of brains to my head prompts me to add salt and then in succession pepper, some milk and finally onion. These certainly improved it and when I served it in a state of terror it went down well enough for all members to ask for 2nd helpings of it; but I think this was mainly due to a desire to encourage me and partly to the effect of the polar air which makes gluttons of us all.
The seal stew was unimprovable so I just let it be adding a coupon of sage and celery seed to disguise its flavour and vowing to do better tomorrow. At the last minute it occurred to me that I might be able to improve it by thickening it up with flour, so I made a white roux and incorporated it with the stew. The bread and butter pudding did not tax my ingenuity much, the addition of butter to the top, egg powder, milk, currants, sugar, and a pinch of salt seemed to produce the desired effect for it too was completely consumed and some members were left asking for more and had to go without. I have determined to give a tinned breakfast and tinned tea daily so ox tongue filled the bill today.
Just as I was about to conclude my labours Blackborrow said to me, "When are you going to make the dough?" Dough indeed, am I then to make bread daily and be a baker as well as a cook. Little did I realize what I had let myself in for when I unprotestingly accepted the post this morning.
So I began to make the dough, after prolonged consultation with the lazy cook, now basking smugly in his stuffy bunk. It is an awful responsibility to have the spoiling of 12 lbs. of our valuable flour for we bake 12 loaves daily. The water added to the flour added to make the dough produces about 20 lbs. of bread from 12 lbs. of flour.
I proceed to make the dough, taking a large jug of tepid salted water and two big cup full of yeast. I work the dough up, but it doesn't look a bit like it does when the cook does it and it takes me half an hour to his quarter; at last, by constantly dredging with flour I get the dough tough enough to lift out of the galvanized bath in which I make it, turn it and put it back, cover it with a cloth and leave it on a rack over the corner of the stove for the night to enable it to rise. Before retiring I get up the various stores required for tomorrow, opening the tins of fresh herring for breakfast and bring in the seal meat placing it in an enameled bucket over the stove to thaw. So ends oh such a strenuous day.
May, 1915. 23 & 31.
23rd: This day I celebrated my birthday believing myself to be thirty-six. I don't feel it, but my friends say I look it every day.
My darling little Renee is six today also, bless her little heart. How I wish I could just hear that she is well. But that is one thing we have to bear in patience. No post, no morning budget with its surprise packets, its bills and requests for rates, etc. Well this part of the world has its advantages after all. No where else could one be so free from cares, worries and responsibilities. All one has to do is live at peace with one's comrades.
Tonight they drank my health and sang "He's a jolly good fellow." The usual thing, but good of them all the same.
31st: Changeable weather again. Temperature was 8F at 10:30 a.m., but -8F at noon, a drop of 16 degrees in 1 1/2 hours. Rather an unusual thing.
Imagine the temperature at home ranging from a degree above freezing point (33F) to 17F say in 1 1/2 hours. All the puddles would freeze solid in a few minutes, pipes would burst in every house and people would be getting frostbitten right and left.
General consternation and newspaper articles.
Here one grows accustomed to regarding this sort of thing with equanimity.
We are glad of the moon at noon now.
The place where the sun ought to be really gives no light worth speaking of, much less writing home about, at the same time (same time as the moon is shining) there is still a magnificent red and crimson line across the northern horizon at noon. Even this will be practically non-existent by mid-winter's day to which we are all looking forward with keen anticipation. It is the day that marks the beginning of the sun's return towards us, though we do not actually expect to see the great luminary until the middle of August! A four month's night!
It is not nearly so bad as one expected it to be. Certainly one notices a little grumpiness and irritability in one's comrades and they notice it very especially in theirs (that's the writer) and they don't forget to say so either. One has to exercise one's self-control. One may go a little further than this and try one's hand as intermediary in one or two little differences, with results that one's humble efforts as peacemaker occasionally bear fruit.
Resentment and estrangement are vile at all times but here they would entirely mar the harmony that, for the most part, exists among us.
June, 1915. 9 & 12.
9th: A beautiful bright day. Temperature -24, minimum -27. Just one of those calm clear days when the low temperature is entirely unappreciable. It feels cold, of course, but then one expects it to be so & is prepared for it, but I am quite sure I have felt a temperature of +24 in England with a bitter east wind to be far more noticeably uncomfortable than it is here today.
I took full advantage of the weather to take some open air exercise. I am afraid I do not get nearly as much as I ought to. My duties as messman, fire tender, ice-man & so on do not give much time to get out, as I do not like bothering other people to do my job whilst I am out. I did so today however. First of all I went for a short walk to try the condition of the surface along the sledge track & finding it suitable I then went for a cycle ride but the valve runners were perished with the cold & as I found I had to blow the tyres up pretty often I returned, got my ski & went out towing behind Marston's dog sledge. This is always very enjoyable. The surface was very rough & hard, rather unsuitable for skiing & I had two spills through getting my skis crossed whilst turning.
My feet got very cold; my toes were aching with cold as one's toes often do at home, though personally I seldom suffer from cold feet. Suddenly the aching stopped & I felt a delightfully comfortable sensation in my feet. This i knew meant that several of my toes were frostbitten. I only had on sea boots & two light pairs of socks; insufficient for such a low temperature. The toe straps of the skis tend to stop the circulation which all predisposes to frostbite. I at once took my skis off & ran back - about a mile - to the ship. The offending digits soon began to return to life, but the paint was fairly acute during the process.
Breakfast - Seal's liver, porridge.
Luncheon - Pea soup (a woollen helmet was found in it just before serving!)
Dinner - Stewed seal & corn beef, cherry tart & cream.
12th: Weather same as yesterday but darker & foggier. +3.
Tonight we can hear loud pressure roaring not far off but it is too risky to go out & watch it. Firstly because it is such thick weather that one could easily get lost & secondly one liable to tread on new ice & go through the dark.
I went out earlier this afternoon when there was some dim diffused light, and went over to see the pressure on our starboard quarter i.e. to the northeast. I then made across the hummocky floe to the pressure on our starboard bow, endeavouring to strike the frozen lead right ahead of the ship which we call Northumberland Avenue and "Via Antarctica.
Walking was hardly the word for it for it was a prolonged stumble from start to finish. One absolutely cannot see the irregularities of the surface at all. One minute one stumbles into a deep drift between two pressure blocks up to ones waist in snow with ones feet in slush or water & the next minute one walks bang into a hummock the size of a cottage which is absolutely invisible at a distance of a foot. It is due to the perfect diffusion of the very dim light.  There are none of the usual shadows which throw the undulations of the surface into relief under normal conditions. The only analogy to it at home is that one builds a snowman it will be found that from certain positions and in certain lights, he becomes almost invisible against a background of snow for lack of shadows, especially most twilight.
Breakfast - Penguin steak, porridge.
Luncheon - Pearl barley broth.
Dinner - Stewed sheeps' tongues, Tapioca pudding.
June, 1915. 15.
Still very mild, foggy and almost quite dark.
Much excitement was afforded us today by the dog drivers settling a controversy as to whose team was the fastest by putting them to the test.
The start was fixed about half a mile away from the ship and the teams raced home against time.
Sir Ernest acted as starter and competent time keepers checked the starting and arrival times.
The teams consisted of seven dogs each with a total weight of about 700 lbs. including the driver.
The orders and times were Wild 2 min. 16 sec., Hurley 2 min. 26 sec., Crean 2 min. 39 sec., McIllroy 3 min. 2 sec., Macklin 3 min. 19 sec., Marston scratched.
The star was taken from the driver's order "Mush.
There are only four order one gives to dogs: "Mush" (probably a corruption of March or Marches) to start; "Ha", to turn left; "Gee", to turn right and the usual "Whoa" for stop. There are generally a good many unofficial orders and expletives added, but whether they really do any more than give relief to the driver's exasperation when the dogs go wrong one is unable to say.
It is extraordinary how responsive a good leader is to the order "Ha" and "Gee".
It is only the leaders who are trained to understand this order. They are no doubt selected from a very large number of dogs as being the most intelligent and they must require very considerable training. Probably they start as team dogs and the fact, that they pick up the "Ha" and "Gee" order independently of their leader is noticed by the driver, and from then onward they receive special training until proficient.
July, 1915. 21.
As, I think, I have before mentioned, pressure generally manifests itself in three ways, "rafting", "tenting" & "piling up.
The former usually takes place when the movements occur in fairly thin ice. I have not observed true "rafting" in ice over six inches thick. It simply means that one sheet of ice slips over or under the other; usually the moving portion appears to slip underneath the stationary portion, but it is not always possible to tell which is the moving portion as the apparent movement is only relative & one is apt to surmise that the stationary portion is the part on which one happens to be standing at the moment.
The other day I was watching some pressure and it appeared to me that the adjacent floe was sliding towards me over our floe. On stepping onto the moving ice the exact opposite appeared to be the case, it seemed then that I was standing on a stationary floe and that our floe was sliding underneath the ice I was on.
Tenting" I have previously described. It occurs when the edges of two floes, i.e. two sides of a crack, of course, in pressing against each other, rise up without actually breaking off before the movement ceases.
Tenting may be complicated when after a good deal of ordinary pressure & piling up, or rafting, has taken place, but when the final movements give rise to tenting. There will then be a "tent" over a pressure ridge.
One other & less frequent form of "pressure" is where the opposing edges are much more snow covered & the movement reciprocating; the result is then a crack filled with frozen slush or brash very treacherous to step on.
We again got the fine bag of four Emperors today which would seem to indicate that there is a number of these fine birds about.
July, 1915. 22 & 23.
22nd: Pressure is always accompanied by more or less noise as is only to be expected.
Heavy "piling up" will at times make such a roar that one cannot make oneself heard above it. On the other hand the sound of light pressure is often no more that a mere creaking or even an intermittent ticking, but if the motion is fairly rapid it may amount to a considerable groaning noise.
I know of nothing quite like it that I could liken it to. The creaking of a bough of a tree is something of the same sound, but there is no music in the ice-groan. It is, rather, uncanny & intimidating. As a rule the noise does not persist in any one place for long. It generally seems to alternate between two or three places a few hundred yards apart, lasting for ten minutes or so at each place. It see that these different places act as the outposts or buffers of the floes and that the two floes adjust themselves gradually each promontory taking up the whole of the pressure in turn &, so to speak, fending off the rest of the floe.
The crumbling away of the faces of these promontories constitutes pressure.
As to the rate of movement I can only say what I have seen, "rafting" moves at speeds up to six inches to a foot a minute, but the two sides of a crack may move longitudinally past each other at nearly double this speed. The night watchman distinguished himself tonight by putting ice on Sir Ernest's fire by mistake for coal & put the fire out to the accompaniment of much spluttering, steam and, I believe, some swearing. It happened in this wise. Outside Sir Ernest's door are two similar boxes one filled with coal & the other with broken ice for the kettle. In half light the watchman, who is a bit of a blind bat, used the wrong box. It appears that someone bad "amusingly" exchanged the usual positions of the two boxes.
23rd: It is a pity that I have here to resort to pencil. It cannot, however, be avoided for I am writing lying on my back & I find that my fountain pen refuses to "fount" in an inverted position though it always seems to do so quite well when in my pocket.
Sciatica has at last got the better of me.
Sir Ernest, in the nicest way, tells me that I have been impudent in my dress; not wearing enough clothes, and although I can honestly say that I have never once felt the cold, I daresay he is right. Certainly I must admit that i have been out a good deal lately when the thermometer stood at about -30 in just the ordinary things once would wear on a mild cold day in England.
Until now my costume has always been as follows 2 pairs socks, sea boots, combinations, pair thin tweed knickers (generally a pair of flannel tennis trousers over the knickers) brown sweater & ordinary couch jacket. When I go out I simply put on a woolen scarf, two woolen helmets &, of course, one, or sometimes two pairs of mits.
As I have no outdoor duties, at present, I am able to please myself whether I go out or not & therefore I practically never find the need of Burberry clothing.
If the weather is such that the dog drivers all go out in Burberry clothing then I either remain on board or else only for a short run in the immediate vicinity of the ship.
Anyhow they ascribe my present attack to going about insufficiently clad especially as to my boots. I rather think however that it is due to the icy cold draught through the cracks of the door against which I sit at meals, and perhaps it was brought to a climax by my being out in the blizzard for rather a long time a week ago today, shoveling snow, though I had my Burberry's on then. I felt I was in for it on the 17th but as I had some extra urgent work shifting packing cases from the deck into the hold I stuck it for a day & went sick on the 18th.
My breakfast, luncheon, dinner consisted of "slop".
September, 1915. 27.
On the 24th when Wild & his retinue of four dog teams went out to the iceberg about seven miles ahead of us, due west, he was lucky enough to find & shoot on his way back a large female crab-eater seal which had come up out of a small "lead" to give birth to her young. As the weather was thick & the dogs were tired he was unable to bring in the quarry so left it where it fell and in order to lighten it for subsequent transportation carried out the usual procedure in such cases - cutting it open to bleed it and removing the useless organs. It was no surprise to find within it a large living fetus & on separating the umbilical cord the poor little unborn seal also expired.
Pressure has been going on intermittently almost ever since the 14th inst., tilting the ship slightly first to one side then to the other until this afternoon it reached a climax by giving the ship such a tremendous nip that her stern was raised nine feet out of the water and the propellor was actually above the surface.
In order to relieve the pressure we were all out on the floe with picks & shovels digging a trench in the ice round the ship, but we got very wet owing to the trench becoming inundated & I doubt whether we did much good as the ship's side was pressed in five or six inches for about eighteen feet all along the outer wall of the port bunker. Contrary to our expectations she stood it; thank God.
Yesterday Sir Ernest decided to get up steam so we spent all the morning pumping sea water into the boiler by hand. No sooner was it full than a leak was discovered at the bottom & we had to pump it all out again. Meanwhile the water ran along the bilges & flooded my storeroom. I have been all day shifting the cases out of the water quite fifty of them. It was a disgusting job. The stinking bilge-water was eighteen inches deep at one end. I feel into it & got very wet & smelly.
Breakfast - Bacon, porridge.
Luncheon - Ox tongue.
Dinner - Tinned haricot mutton, red currant tart & cream.
October, 1915. 18 & 19.
18th: Temperature max. 27. A mild misty damp day.
After the "pressure" of yesterday we thought that things had settled down a bit but it was not to be so.
We were having tea peacefully at 4 p.m. after having spent the greater part of the day pumping out & bailing out the foreward lower hold, when we heard & felt several light bumps, such as we have grown quite accustomed to, followed by one very loud one which aroused our curiosity sufficiently to cause us to casually saunter up on deck. There are always possibilities of the "pressure" resulting in some interesting spectacle for the mighty forces which can split asunder vast floes of ice many feet thick must always be somewhat awe inspiring when at work, but we were not prepared for what we saw today.
No sooner had we reached the deck than the ship was heaved up suddenly & violently & immediately rolled over slowly onto her side until she lay on her port side to all intents & purposes on her "beam ends". It looked at first as if she must turn turtle.
Everything was at once pandemonium.
Kennels, spars, sledges, etc. all sliding down the deck & the dogs howling with terror.
We feared at first that many of the dogs were injured if not killed but eventually we found that none were seriously hurt which was really marvellous for the kennels are in batches of about ten weighing with the spars etc. on top of them say half a ton & they were all jumbled up & sandwiched like carriages in a railway accident.
Our first task was to liberate the dogs, & no easy one on account of the weights of the kennels & the difficulty of working at all with the deck at an angle of fifty degrees & very slippery with thawed slush & blubber all over it.
At the time, I happened to be standing against an open space on the port side amidships i.e. the side to which the ship heeled over. Before I had time to consider what was the most useful thin I could do a kennel just beside me commenced to slide overboard.
19th: Temperature 29. Mild & moist.
Any amount of work rectifying the derangements of yesterday & refilling the boiler. All the loose wood has been broken up, event the Norwegian "pram" boat, & placed in the bunker for fuel, the blubber being taken out of the bunker where it had been stored since the beginning of the month and placed on deck. With the help of one of the men, McCarty I bailed the rest of the water out of the fore hold & straightened things up a bit.
I had just time to release its occupant "Simian", one of the finest dogs, before the kennel shot out through the open space. Just as I thought it must fall overboard it jammed in some way hanging right over the side & later on it was rescued.
No sooner had I got hold of the dog than the heavy midship kennels with all the sledges & other gear on them came sliding down upon me & the carpenter, jamming us in between these & the kennels on the ship's side, & apparently crushing several dogs. Meanwhile the dogs in the ship's side kennels began to fight the midship dogs who had so precipitately descended upon them.
We managed to keep back the kennels sufficiently to prevent injury to ourselves and until Sir Ernest had gathered "hands" to pass a rope & tackle round them & relieve us of their weight.
Thereafter there was no end of work to do recovering & securing all the sundry gear. All this was very difficult with the deck at such a steep angle of thirty degrees, but some of us got long battens & nailed them down to the deck fore & aft a yard apart & this provided a fair foot hold.
Mr. Wild & I had "braces & bits" and crawled into the kennels to drill holes for the securing ropes to pass through. The dogs couldn't make it out at all to see us crouching inside the kennels whilst they themselves had to sit outside.
October, 1915. 24 & 25.
24th: We had the good luck to secure two seals on 22nd inst. A male & female one year old animals probably & therefore excellent eating, especially the latter as she was not with pup.
I had written the above & had discontinued writing for the evening in order to work the gramophone for the general entertainment of the party, and had just put on the third tune - "The Wearing of the Green" - when a terrific crash shook the ship with a prolonged shiver like an earthquake & she listed over about 8 degrees to starboard.
We finished the tune and then went up on deck to see if anything unusual had occurred. By this time Sir Ernest had been out on the floe and one could judge by his grave look that something really was amiss, & it soon proved to be even more serious than any of us had anticipated for within five minutes we were all hard at work preparing to abandon the ship as she had had her sternpost almost wrenched out and water was pouring in through the crack.
There was little time to ask questions or to comment at all upon the damage for we were working like demons getting up all possible provisions and clothing, navigation instruments, sledging gear, dog food & miscellaneous impediments with a view to quitting ship and sledging over the ice to Graham's Land.
It is surprising what an enormous amount of work can be got through in a given time when one realizes thoroughly that dear life depends on it.
Marston, James & I were working down in the after hold extracting cases close by where the water was coming in down there & we could plainly hear the ominous rush of running water below us, meanwhile the noise of the ship breaking up was deafening.
That Sir Ernest had decided to fill up the boiler some days ago was a piece of miraculous foresight though it was probably more with a view to steaming than to pumping out that he determined upon it.
Some of us who recently ventured amongst ourselves to criticise his decision on this point as being a little premature now feel well reproached for our hasty utterances.
It was, as I said, a mercy that we had the boilers full and the furnaces alight. They were, however, "banked" i.e. being kept as low as possible in order to economise coal, just enough fire being maintained to keep the water hot.
Orders were at once given to get up steam to drive the steam pump and the two engineers...
I was writing the above words when I was cut short by the recommencement of heavy pressure which resulted in our finally abandoning the ship.
We spent an uneasy night but slept on board in our respective cabins. I alone in the hold. It was a little gruesome in the hold by myself with the noise of the water in the ship & pressure groaning outside but I was one of the very few who slept well.
25th: After yesterday's alarms it was a great relief to have a quiet day free from pressure but owing to the leakage we were all at the pumps all day & all night by watches.
The carpenter turned to like a trojan & has worked continuously for 48 hrs. building a coffer dam across the inside of the stern of the ship with a view to minimise the leakage & with so much success already that it has at any rate considerably reduced it. We shifted all stores from aft foreward so as to be able to get the stern out of the water as soon as the ice opens enough to float us again. What with alternate quarter hours on the pump and shifting gear all day it has been hard work, but the life of the ship & ourselves depends upon it and we all work with a will.
For some time past now we have been divided into two watches and have been working more or less as a ship's routine instead of as a shore party expedition as we were all the winter.
This breaking up of the floe is very undesirable just now with low temperature as it seems to result directly in heavy pressure and no real open water exists to any extent anywhere near us.
Let us hope, anyway, that the ice movement has subsided & that nothing untoward will occur for the future. Things have been a little too strenuous for us of late.
Meals even have been rather scrappy, the constant shifting of stores makes various items inaccessible in turn so that we have been unable to adhere to our strict order of rotation.
October, 1915. 26.
Pumping continues ceaselessly day & night and we are able to keep the water under.
Routine work is much deranged.
Until we can manage to dispense with the steam pump it means using up much of our valuable coal supply. I believe we have barely 34 tons left and are now using 3/4 tons daily for pumping only. The engineers are splendid. They tackle the matter with a vengeance and are burning a quantity of seal blubber to eke out our slender stock of coal.
No one who has not seen blubber nor seen it burn can quite appreciate what it is like or what a high value it has as a fuel. In appearance it is much like the fat on bacon if one can imagine the fat of a pig stripped off in one piece about two to three inches thick adhering to the skin.
As used by us it is cut off from the seal with the skin in one great sheet & then cut longitudinally into strips about six feet long by six inches wide which can, if required, be further cut up into small brick-like chunks for convenience in burning in the galley-range. Left in a temperature below freezing the strips soon harden up to about the consistency of the bacon of commerce or harder. The whole of the fat is richly impregnated with oil (seal oil) which forms one of the chief constituents of "train oil" and which burns fiercely. In the early part of last century seal oil was the principal ingredient of the oil used then for street illumination.
Further heavy pressure took place again this evening lifting first the bows then the stern several feet out of water. We were all out at once digging trenches which helped the ice to break up & pass under the ship. The movement lasted about three hours and closed the leakage at the stern to some extent. In view of having to abandon the ship we lowered three boats onto the floe, sledges & stores, but slept quietly enough on board for the night of the 26th & 27th.
Part 3 - Ocean Camp
October, 1915. 27.
Things have taken a terribly serious turn - our worst fears are realized, not that we are in any way downhearted, for whilst there's life, there's hope.
Hitherto I have written of pressure as a sort of abstract manifestation of ice movement - even criticising it, often flippantly.
We have seen so much around us and our stout little craft has out ridden so many of these glacial convulsions that we had become over-confident of her invulnerability.
To have her literally torn asunder beneath our feet as she has been today has come as a rude shock which the consequent discomforts will do little to mitigate.
The ice around the ship had been working all day; the ship merely forming a portion, as it were, of an immense pressure ridge. It is part & parcel of it. If the ship were not where it is the space occupied by it would be filled with great clocks of crumpled floe ice. As it is, this very ice is straining all the while to oust the ship & occupy its place whilst the ship, crushed laterally to the utmost limit of compression, resists the onslaught valiantly and, by intermittent rising, deflects the great rugged edges of the impinging floes so that they either pass noisily underneath her, lifting her a good deal in so doing, or else they bend upward & snap off in huge slab-like blocks six or seven feet thick and weighing as many tons. In this latter case the blocks are often pushed high up the ship's side before they finally topple over backwards on to the oncoming ice and they nearly always cause the ship to list over to one side or the other.
Pressure had been going on spasmodically all day.
The carpenter was working hard at the cofferdam and pumping employed all hands. We were only just able to keep pace with the leakage. Down aft one could hear the ominous sound of the in-rushing water.
Our little ship was stove in, hopelessly crushed & helpless amongst the engulfing ice.
Nothing that we could do for her was any more good and as before our eyes she commenced to settle down first by the bows then by the stern, we bade her good bye with our hearts. Having accomplished its deadly mission the ice seemed then to play with her like a cat with a mouse, now hoisting her a little now letting her subside once more and as if to having wrested from us our stronghold dangled it before us, as it were, in mocking irony.
The forces of nature had made their counter attack and had driven us out from our position but thoughts of surrender never entered our heads.
Our immediate action lay in making preparations for a safe retirement.
The only question was not what was the best thing to be done but what was the next best thing to be done.
To few is it vouchsafed to see so impressive a sight. Confident as we were of the future such a calamity could not fail to evoke some emotion in the stoutest heart. Even Wild as courageous a man as there is amongst us admitted that it game him a pain in the stomach to behold it.
For the first time we realized that we were face to face with as serious a one of the gravest disasters that can befall a polar expedition, beside which mere besetment is a bagatelle.
For the first time it cam whom etc us that we were wrecked - that we had abandoned our ship; but we were not beaten. Britishers do not suffer defeat so easily as that.
At one time we expected every minute to see the last of her but strange to say she did not sink.
After settling down so far as to flood all her holds she remained fixed in the ice, well down but by no means entirely submerged.
By 8:30 p.m. everything necessary for our proposed sledging journey to either Robertson Island, Snow Hill Island or Paulet Island ___ miles away respectively, was out on the floe and then, in spite of the danger, we all went on board to have our last square meal - Beauvais pemmican soup, bread, jam, cocoa, tinned fruit and cream.
The cook stuck manfully to his post (in the intervals of quietude) lighting and extinguishing the it each time for fear of the stove breaking loose & setting fire to the ship.
I went down into the foretold to get up the best things I could find but the water was then four feet deep and many cases were afloat and it was as much as I could do to squeeze in and get out the few articles we had for supper.
We did not let things depress us and even contrived to be merry. Dr. McIllroy was especially cheerful and made one of the usual type of Antarctic puns. "Let's have all we can eat today, Colonel," he said, "for tomorrow we diet." "At what time tomorrow do we die at?", I replied. Rather sinister under the circumstances perhaps, but better than being down-hearted anyhow.
Sir Ernest is now confronted with as big a problem as he has, I suppose, ever tackled: how to extricate us from this serious dilemma and ensure reaching civilization with the whole party alive & well.
As above indicated his intentions are to make over the ice, with two boats on runners and all the dog sledges, for one of the three nearest islands.
It will be a big & strenuous job but he hopes to make 5 miles a day. I cannot but help think that this is altogether too sanguine an estimate over such a hummocky surface intersected everywhere with great pressure ridges. Without the boats it would be quite possible, but such unwieldy loads cannot but be a serious impediment.
The ship not has a 25 degree list. At midnight there was 6 ft. of water in the lower hold when I went down to my cabin in the manifold for the last time to secure my boxes and penates, a waterproof sheet to sleep on & one or two other oddments, and the lateral pressure was so great that the deck had literally burst under the strain and the planks were all starting up like so many matches pushed out of a box.
The tents were first erected on the port side of the ship, but just as we were turning in the floe began to split up and we hurriedly struck camp and moved everything over a pressure ridge to the other side of the ship & finally turned in dead beat at 1 a.m.
About 4 p.m. came the beginning of the end.
We all felt at once that the crash she received was beyond her power of resistance, and it was so.
She was rising first by the bows then by the stern. Crash followed crash as she vibrated to & fro amidst the embracing ice.
Everyone kept their heads splendidly. Sir Ernest's grand example inspired us all with a confidence in our leader, in a moment such as this, that caused us to look to him for direction in all we did and to work in unison implicitly obeying his orders. For most of the time he stood on the upper deck holding on to the rigging, smoking a cigarette with a serious but somewhat unconcerned air.
To each of us, as occasion offered, he said a word or two of encouragement, such as "Don't forget to take such & such a thing with you if we have to leave the ship." To me, "Mind you put your old diary in my bag as it has been kept rathe more regularly than mine, I believe.
It had! Here it is. I don't think Sir Ernest has written as much in a month as I have in a week, though (heavily scratched out) his is, no doubt, better stuff. Still all that is no business of mine, but the point is that his remark on such an occasion was sufficiently irrelevant in the best sense to entirely allay my apprehension for the time as to the ultimate issue.
As previously mentioned, the three boats were already on the floe, but now came the order. "Out all sledges", followed by "All sledging provisions ashore", then "clothing" and at 8 p.m., "All dogs to be taken ashore.
The sledge portion of the aero-motor sledge, the engine pylon of which has never been removed from its huge packing case was finally got out and the upper hamper hacked off it in view of using it for the transportation of one of the boats.
The sledging provisions have been for a long time ranged on the upper deck in case of an emergency & now that the emergency had com eat was not long before they were all hove overboard on to the floe where willing hands removed them instantly to a place of safety. The ice rising up the ship's side greatly hampered this work and exposed us all to serious danger at times, for if one happened to be carrying a heavy case over a slab of ice in the act of breaking up it was quite within the bounds of probability that one might slip down into one of the numerous small chasms which form between the firm ice and the breaking piece, there to be crushed as I have often seen boxes & pieces of wood crushed.
By the exercise of extreme caution & the guidance of providence no accidents at all occurred and we did not lose a single case.
At first the picks & shovels were hard at work but the futility of adopting such palliatives was soon only too apparent and duly abandoned in favour of more profitable evolutions.
The ice reached the upper deck by 6 p.m.; at the same time the stern post was, to all intents & purposes, rent clean out of her. Her stern being raised high in the air we were able to see the extent of the damage & appreciate its utter irremidiability.
It was the most impressive sight I have ever seen. Even Mr. Wild, as courageous a man as I know, admitted to me that it gave him a pain in the stomach to behold it. It gave me all that & more, for the first time in my life, I realized that we were face to face with one of the gravest disasters that can befall a polar expedition, beside which mere besetment is a bagatelle.
The portaging of the boats over the great pressure ridge across the bows of the ship demanded the whole of our combined energy & was rendered particularly dangerous by the fact that at the lowest, and therefore easiest place to cross, there was much open water beneath the loose blocks forming the ridge (as shown in the rough diagram below...maybe take this out if no diagram)
Just what one's sentiments are in such circumstances as this it is a little hard to say, for, as so often happens, on these occasions there is so much to be done at the moment of emergency that by the time one has leisure to give it any serious consideration on has become more or less accustomed to the new condition of things, and even in the most extreme cases as long as one has food & shelter and is dry the future always seems full of hope.
Hunger, or even prospective hunger, make a lot of difference to one's outlook.
There is nothing like keeping the body, & hence the mind, well occupied during periods of peril such as we have just passed through.
The state of the weather also causes a strong mental reaction.
A singular little incident occurred on the floe whilst we were getting the stores out. Sir Ernest was standing about 20 yards away from the ship when the ice suddenly burst beneath him rising up into a hummock exactly in the manner of pantomime demon's star trap.
November, 1915. 1 & 4.
1st: Temperature +18
This morning broke almost as bad as yesterday; snowing and that mysterious diffused light that one has seen nowhere else but here. A light so strange that whilst it is perfectly bright enabling one to see to do things just as on any other day yet the rugged surface of the floe appears as one unbroken flat expense & only the very tallest hummocks become visible. The sub-features of the surface & the pitfalls beneath one's very feet are absolutely invisible & yet it is not anything like a mistiness in the air whatever.
The impossibility of hauling the boats for any great distance over the present loose surface is so very evident after our strenuous efforts of the last day or two that Sir Ernest has now definitely decided to remain here where we are to subsist on seals & penguins if possible, saving our valuable sledging food and trust to drifting northward with the pack ice. We may do it yet; it all depends on whether we secure sufficient seals & penguins. We got 3 seals today and one yesterday.
There is also the strong probability of leads opening close to us & our being able to row northwards, but wherever we go to we must endeavour to reach either Snow Hill or Paulet Island.
Today we struck camp at 1 p.m. and pitched again about a quarter of a mile further on and about 1 1/2 miles from the wreck but on an apparently firm old floe which is not likely to split for a long time which we have called Ocean Camp.
We shifted the two boats with the utmost difficulty. The surface is terrible, like nothing that any of us had seen before around us. We were sinking at times up to our hips, & everywhere the snow was 2 ft. deep.
So long as we have the bare minimum of food we shall be all right.
Breakfast - Bovril ration (6 rations) i.e. 6 men's rations for 28 men & 2 biscuits each.
Luncheon - Tea, (no milk or sugar) & 1 biscuit.
Dinner - Boiled seal (no salt), 1 biscuit.
4th: Temperature zero.
Very cold during the night. Misty & cold early but it soon brightened into a magnificent day.
It has been at last decided to make a frantic effort to get some of the stores out of the ship. The carpenter went off early to the ship & directed operations with so much success that he succeeded in cutting through the three inch deck now three feet under water and making so large a hole that many cases floated up.
Others were subsequently raised by means of a boat hook.
The cutting of the hole must have been terribly hard work, for the ship is very stoutly built & the deck is made of three inch planking, moreover even the most advantageous position was two & a half feet under water. It is an act of providence that the provisions happen to be all stowed on the port side of the ship, the side which is now uppermost.
The method employed was chiselling with a large three inch ice chisel sharpened up for the purpose, rigged to a pile-driving tackle & hauled up & down in the manner of a pile driver. As soon as a long enough slit had been hacked out a saw was inserted & gradually by chiselling & sawing a hole nearly three feet square was made, about two feet from the ship's side and close by the ward-room door, that is immediately over the corner of the hold where the most of the provisions were stored.
Later on a second hole was pierced more foreward and a "fish-tackle" fastened on to the intervening woodwork between the two holes. By hoisting the "fish-tackle" the whole of the remaining woodwork was rent away and the work of extracting the submerged cases proceeded.
At times the men were working with their arms in ice cold water up to the shoulder for half an hour at a stretch.
It is really wonderful what has been accomplished by dint of dogged perseverance, skill & toil. No less than 105 cases of provisions have been brought to the camp today representing some two tons of provisions.
What this means to us in our present destitution words fail to express.
Breakfast - Bovril ration (9 rations) & Dog pemmican ( 1 cake).
Luncheon - Seal steaks fried in blubber, tea & milk.
Dinner - Curried seal, tea, milk & sugar.
November, 1915. 21.
Maximum +37. Temperature +30.
A wretched day, high temperature & rainy sleet all day. Wind S to S.W increasing about 6 p.m.
Before going further I had intended to more fully describe our cooking & feeding arrangements, but today has been so full of incident that my intentions will have to be postponed in favour of more pressing matter. This morning I went over to the wreck with a sledging party - Wild, Crean, Hurley, Hudson & McIlroy to cut another section of gunwale of the motor boat with which the carpenter is to raise the siding of the other sledging boat, the Dudley Docker, in the same clever manner as he has raised those of the James Caird.
Whilst we were working at the motor boat, I went over to the Dump camp and with the end of an ice axe discovered several useful articles: a box of 25 cartridges, hair clipper, some reels of thread, pairs of socks, a plate & mug, a pillow, and a Jaeger sleeping bag. With this heavy load, I returned part of the way alone rejoining the other party further on. I had to cross a good deal of open water and whilst "dog-trotting" over the lumps of floating slush & ice fell in well over my knees just before reaching the opposite edge of the floe of one lead & got miserably wet in consequence, but luckily I did not lose my ice axe or my booty.
Just previously a seal had come up right alongside me. He seemed rather astonished to see me & was making for the open water again. I was just in time to head him off & felled him with a lucky blow from an ice axe killing him instantaneously & then cutting his throat to bleed him. This was the first seal killed otherwise than by shooting.
Some of the ice was moving very fast, all opening up, no pressure.
This evening as we were mostly taking it easy & reading we heard Sir Ernest call out, "She's going." We were all out in a second & up on the lookout station & other points of vantage & sure enough there was our poor ship a mile & a half away breathing her last. She went down bows first, her stern raised up in the air. It gave one a sickening sensation to see it, or mastless & useless as she has been she yet formed a welcome landmark and has always seemed to link us with civilization. Without her our destitution seems more acute, our isolation more complete.
Breakfast - Seal steak, 2 bannocks, tea.
Luncheon - Dry figs & custard, tea (1 tin figs - 2 lbs. - per unit of 4), 1 bannock.
Supper - Seal hooch, beetroot (1 lb. tin per unit), cocoa, 1 bannock.
December, 1915. 29.
After a further reconnoitre Sir Ernest pronounced the ice ahead to be quite unnegotiable and so at 8:30 p.m. last night to the intense disappointment of all, instead of forging ahead, we retired half a mile so as to get onto stronger ice and by 10 p.m., we had camped and all turned in again without a further meal.
The extra sleep was much needed however disheartening this check may be. I slept soundly until 5 a.m., Blackborrow was nightwatchman from 4 a.m. to 8 a.m. kindly lighting the fires for me at that hour.
Breakfast same as yesterday at 7 a.m., after which we began to settle down & several dog teams & myself on skis went out seal hunting.
We had only been out a short time when suddenly up went the recall flag on the boat's mast and we al came in at once to find that Sir Ernest had decided to retire another 1/2 mile to a still safer old floe where we camped at 11:30 a.m.
I first aid two relay trips with the boats all the way and lastly pulled over the galley and served luncheon of tea & 2 bannocks & cold suet (1 oz. per man) which we have been having lately.
Three seals were captured so we have enough meat to go on with for a day or two, but I must say that the general apathy with regard to catching seals now that we may have to settle down for a bit is rather curious.
Unless we get a big store of them it means breaking into our reserve sledging rations and even killing the dogs for want of food and either of these things just now would be fatal to our success, though we shall, of course, have to kill the dogs as soon as we take to the boats.
I spent the afternoon stacking provisions, not that there is much of them now, alas. The weather is pleasant enough, mild in the shade & even hot in the sun, but it has its disadvantage in rendering the surface very soft so that one sinks down to one's knees at every step and one's feet are therefore continually wet. At night the surface freezes but it will seldom support one's weight, & therefore it doubles the weight of the sledge.
January, 1916. 16 & 17.
16th: A seal came up close to the floe this morning. Wild and I went on skis and he shot it. I went on and soon found another and left a flag on a ski stick to mark the place; Wild came out and shot it and meanwhile I espied yet another from the top of the sloping berg and went on it and killed it with one of my skis and a pocket knife. All three were taken in by dog teams.
In the afternoon I again went out accompanied by Blackborrow on a spare pair of skis which were brought up yesterday from Ocean Camp.
We were lucky enough to find two seals together and after a considerable and exciting chase, stunned them both, on just on the point of entering the water, cut their throats and gutted them, the latter precaution being necessary to prevent them, the carcasses becoming unfit for human consumption in the event of our being unable to send for them for a day or two.
We were at a great disadvantage in the deep, soft snow having taken off our skis to use as weapons!
Whilst engaged upon disemboweling the seals, two Adelie penguins came up right beside us, both of which we managed to secure.
Just as we reached camp, heavy snow, and a southerly breeze sprang up. The snow lasted a short while only.
Hurley's dog team was shot today, seven fine dogs. It is heartrending to see these plucky little animals being ignominiously slaughtered, but it is absolutely unavoidable.
17th: The long desired southerly wind continues good and strong and the temperature has dropped in consequence. The cold makes itself very much felt after so much mild weather. I was out early piloting the dog teams to our captures of yesterday and to my delight we found another seal close to the carcasses. I killed him at once & then went out about a mile to the south the party came on two more seals. Just then the recall signal was hoisted at the camp so the party returned, killing an Emperor penguin on the way. Later Hurley and I went out on ski and easily killed the two seals with an ice ax and gutted them returning to camp just in time for luncheon. I had borrowed Wild's knife and carelessly left it out by the seals, so I had to go out a third time to recover it, and reckon I did the best part of ten miles during the day, but it is well worth it to capture even one seal, let alone three and an Emperor.
They were not sent for as the dogs and drivers having already brought in three seals had done enough, but the carcasses will be safe enough where they are.
April, 1916. 7 & 14.
7th: A fine day again an the island is sight part of the morning.
We got another sea leopard but no stomach-fish this time. These, undoubtedly, indicate that we are near the pack edge for they prey on the penguins which resort to the edge of the pack about this time of year. The floe split again suddenly just after we had turned in. The watchman calls out "crack" and we are all out in a moment or two, but this frequent splitting up of the floe gets on one's nerves a bit for one never knows whether the ice is going to open underneath one's sleeping bag during the night.
The boats were cute of from the rest of the camp for a time but the crack kept opening and closing and whilst it was closed we got the boats across in safety on their sledges.
14th: It was a truly magnificent sunrise, as beautiful a one as we had seen and the brightness and genial glow put new warmth into our half frozen bodies and raised new hopes in our hearts. The spray during the night had frozen on our outer clothing and our Burberry blouses were as stiff as parchment on us. As they thawed out they became correspondingly wet, but when the sun got higher in the sky its warmth, aided by the breeze was sufficient to dry things and we hung out our mitts, socks, etc., on the stays of the mast and got them fairly dry during the day.
During the whole voyage, even on the coldest nights, we found that in spite of our mitts being so sopping wet that we had to take them off from time to time to wring the water out of them, they kept our hands reasonably warm. Or if not exactly warm, they did get so cold as to be in danger of frost bite, though they felt wet and cold all the time, as was only to be expected. In the case of our socks, however, this did not apply and we had to resort to every possible expedient to keep our feet fairly dry.
As it grew lighter, Elephant Island loomed up through the mist on our port hand and for various reasons, thenceforth, became our goal.
It was considered that the precipitousness of Clarence might preclude a landing thereon, and, should we be carried by adverse winds or currents to the eastward we might fail to weather it altogether and Elephant Island was approximately no further off.
If, on the other hand, having set our course for Elephant Island, we should fail to weather it we should still have Clarence Island under our lee to the eastward, and various other small islets if we should be carried to the westward. A lot might happen in a run of forty miles, and we were not for taking any risks just then, so that decision, to run for the central point of the group, received general endorsement.
This morning was a truly beautiful one, we all got quite warm again rowing, Marston in the "Docker" enlivened us with songs and we all felt much happier then we had for several days, confident this time of making the land. If the S.E. wind, which had sprung up, was maintained throughout the day it seemed probable that we should make the land before night fall. Except for sucking ice chips, we had had nothing to quench our thirst with since the milk of the evening of the 12th inst., as whilst waiting for the poor old "Stancomb Wills" to catch up, the "Docker" drew up to a small lump of ice and tried to secure it with an ice axe, but it proved, on closer acquaintance, to be bigger than at first supposed and the attempt to take it in tow by means of impaling it with the business end of the ice axe all but resulted in the loss of that valuable implement. Not having slowed down they overshot it by so much that by the time they had checked their was the "growler" was far astern of them that it was not worth while "going about" to retrieve it, but coming on another piece they commenced preparations to secure it in a more systematic manner. Just then the "Caird" came up and Sir Ernest, being anxious to proceed, ordered them to desist. This proved unfortunate for, save for a very small fragment of ice in the "Docker", and part of which was subsequently given to the "Caird", we did no encounter any more ice and were thereafter without means of quenching our thirst. We had too, to wait about of half an hour for the "Stancomb Wills" to catch us up. She had been the lame duck all along, and though her presence added enormously to our resources and carrying capacity, yet she seriously impeded the progress of the other two boats. We could but sympathize with her occupants as, having a wholly inadequate spread of canvas, she was heavily handicapped and her crew had the harder work on the oars, besides which , her low gunwale rendered her much the wettest boat of the three. We never pulled more than four oars at a time in any of the boats so as to work the crews in two watches by half hour spells.
This was a very satisfactory arrangement as it gave one a complete rest between spells but not long enough to get chilled through; one was generally glad enough to get back on the oars, after a resting spell, to get warm again. Signs were not wanting that we were beginning to have about enough of it. More than one of the party in the "Wills" was suffering from general exhaustion, but nothing could be done for them just then. We had to go on. The ultimate safety and resuscitation of the party depended upon our reaching terra firma at the earliest possible moment. Delay was dangerous - dispatch imperative.
Blackborrow, one of the sailors in the "Wills", reported that he thought there was something wrong with his feet, and examination proved this to be only too true; but it was impossible to do much for him under the circumstances, so he had to grin and bear it.
Fortunately severe frost-bite itself is unaccompanied by pain; it is the revival that is painful. There was little likelihood of Blackborrow's feet reviving at all until we reached the land when proper means could be supplied. Earlier in the morning, Greenstreet in the "Docker" had found that one of his feet had "gone". On taking off his sock he revealed a foot as white as a tallow which I eventually succeeded in restoring to vitality in the classic manner by alternately massaging it and placing it against my bare stomach inside my shirt. Quite the "little hero" that time.
We sailed on and on all morning before a fresh breeze passing a couple of bergs in one of which into which the swell was rolling and breaking against the steep slopes of the berg, with a fine roar. Another berg rather resembled a Red Indian's feathered headgear, but still the land did not seem to get appreciably nearer.
Of pack or drift there was none. It was evident that we had a clear run to the land. All depended on the wind. At 3 p.m. it died down. Two hours later heavy lowering skies to the N.W. betokened a storm brewing and at 5 p.m. the sot burst upon us with a strong S.W. wind. We were apparently about 8 miles from Elephant Island before the gathering darkness shut if off from view; in reality we were more like 18 miles off, but we were able to see the details and configuration of the land very cleary, though we afterwards found out that what we took to be rocky cliffs a couple of hundred feet high were actually mountains as many thousands.
For some time we had been feeling the affects of thirst, and, having no ice left, we now took to chewing raw frozen seal meat for the sake of the moisture in it, and very good it seemed to be at that juncture.
It now grew very dark, the gale increased, the seas, lashed into foam by the wind, dashed over us in spray chilling us through to the marrow, and we were not wrong in supposing that we were in for yet another night of extreme exposure. But all the while, we felt we were nearing land, the land that would dispel all our troubles. The wind now veered round to N.W. and this brought the sea full on our port beam. We were able to sail well enough on this "slant" but the change of wind caused more and more water to break over the boats and we had to resort to almost continuous bailing.
Before the night had fairly set in, the "Caird" took the "Wills" in tow and henceforward never let go of her. Sir Ernest hailed the "Docker" and she drew up along side him, he shouted out some directions but his voice was almost wholly inaudible above the storm, though, as we correctly assumed, he was enjoining them to follow and keep in sight of the 'Caird" all night. Practically ever since we had first started Sir Ernest had been standing erect all day and night on the stern counter of the "Caird", only holding on to one of the stays of the little mizzen mast, conning our course the whole time the boats were underway.
How he stood the incessant vigil and exposure is marvellous, but he is a wonderful man and so is his constitution. He simply never spares himself if, by his individual toil, he can possibly benefit anyone else.
A characteristic instance of his unselfishness in this was occurred in the boats. Hurley lost his mitts, Sir Ernest seeing this, at once divested himself of his own, and in spite of the fact that he was standing up in the most exposed position all the while, he insisted upon Hurley's acceptance of the mitts, and on the latter's protesting, Sir Ernest was on the point of throwing them overboard rather than wear them when one o this subordinates had to go without; as a consequence Sir Ernest had one finger rather severely frost bitten.
Captain Worsley in the "Docker" too stuck to his post gallantly hour by hour steering his boat skillfully to safety, sitting up in the stern wet through to the skin. Lt. Hudson and Crean who steered the Wills alternately are likewise deserving of the highest praise.
We again did the best we could during the night pulling the tent clothes over us to afford some protection from the cold and wet. We were under reefed sail all night, rowing became out of the question early in the evening owing to the roughness of the sea.
We had to bail almost continuously and as this was much hindered by the encumbrance of baggage over the well in the stern we several times contemplated throwing certain articles overboard as the necessity of access to the well became more and more urgent and finally in the "Docker" we ejected the greater part of the sack of seal meat. About midnight, Cheetham, our old sailor-officer in the "Docker", thought he heard the boat's back cracking and so there was nothing for it but to shift some of the cases from forward aft, a task of no small difficulty under the circumstances, and thereafter they had all to crowd down in the stern and keep on shifting every time that bailing was in progress. Wave after wave dashed its spray over us and we got miserably wet.
The "Docker" had no light but the "Caird" had a lamp which she exhibited from time to time and by means of which the former were able to keep in touch with her for some time.
Having no light and only a pocket compass which was quite invisible in the dark, Captain Worsley elected to keep his boat as close to windward as possible, so as to keep both the land and the "Caird" under his lee. He feared too that the wind might have veered still more to the northward. As a result, he finally failed to the "Caird's" intermittent light any more and thereafter was, so to speak, "on his own".
The boat made a great but more leeway than headway. After, we wondered whether we might not ultimately overshoot the land, if we had not indeed already done so, by passing between Elephant and Clarence Islands, so much longer was the way than we had expected it to be. At times we thought we saw the faint "blink" of Elephant's snow cap right ahead of us.
About 3 a.m. the moon rose and some diffused light penetrated the barge but the moon itself was not visible. Only twice during the night and after repeated efforts, did we succeed in keeping matches alight long enough, under the tent cloth, to see the little compass and so enable Captain Worsley to verify his course and the wind.
One of two of her crew now noticed that he was showing signs of succumbing to his unceasing vigil; several times he did not seem to hear them speaking to him, finally they could get no replies from him, his head sunk on to his chest and he seemed on the point of collapse, so they persuaded him to lie down for a bit and let Greenstreet take the helm.
Now the night was nearly done; the worst experience of all our trip was coming to a happy conclusion, but just what the issue would be we were still in some doubt as we could not yet certainly see the land.
April, 1916. 22.
This is now the fifth day of continuous blizzard, and it is even worse today than it has been. It is quite impossible to do any work for it is as much as one can do to even stand up in the wind. We have spent all day in our bags except when our few duties compelled us to be up and about for the sake of shelter rather than for warmth.
We have our meals under great difficulties beneath the boat sitting up in our bags in the limited space available. Where I sleep there is no sufficient head room so I partake of mine eating of my elbow and very awkward it is especially as it is pitch dark under the boat owing to the necessity of keeping the blanket door tightly closed to keep out the drift as much as possible. Every time anyone passes in or out of a tent a whirl of drift flies in through the door covering everything and before one can brush it off much of it has thawed so that in spite of the most stringent precautions one cannot avoid getting wet even inside the tents. Anyone going out, even for a minute, brings in on their persona and boots a great deal of snow and in the small space at the door it is very hard to get rid of it; it collects on the pieces of sailcloth board and so forth with which we have partially covered the pebbles and freezes on to them until it is again thawed out by the sleeping bags lying on top to it. The sleepers nearest the doors have by far the worst time of it in this respect.
The temperature inside our tents varies from a little above to a little below freezing so that the flooring is in a state of perpetual delignescence, in other words, the sail cloth and other sundry scraps that comprise it are constantly wringing wet and further absorb the moisture due to the thawing of the ice amongst the pebbles underneath.
Another source of wetness is the thawing of the snow at the back of the boat along the gunwale where we placed it to make a weather tight joint. This was unavoidable for there was no other material to be had and without it the blizzard would come flying in and soon overwhelm us, for, naturally, we have set the boat up with its back to the wind as far as possible.
It is anything but a pleasant life just at present and I have heard Mr. Wild and several others who ought to now assert that if this sort of thing continues for much longer some of the party will undoubtedly go under. As it is, the vitality of all of us must already be much lowered for no constitution can be quite immune to days of this sort of thing, wet through all day and all night in a low temperature and on a low diet. We are using our sledging foods rather freely but dare not reduce the ration yet, for this is just the very occasion for which we have revered them and when they become a most valuable factor in retaining our vitality. For breakfast we are having a good hoosh of Bovril sledging ration nearly three quarter strength (6 oz. each), one biscuit and a slice of cold raw blubber for luncheon and a seal stew for supper. Considering our circumstances this is not at all bad.
We find the raw seal's blubber at luncheon very acceptable, and are now quite unconscious of its rank taste, indeed, cut into thin slices we fancy that it forms quite a passable substitute for butter and our only regret is that we cannot afford to have a second helping of it. Foods are appetizing or not according to the degree that the system insensibly demands them. What we lack here is heat, our systems therefore demand heat producing fuel and fat is the best heat giving food so that anything in the ay of fat or oil seems most acceptable to us just now and the necessities of the system overcome the nauseating flavour.
Yesterday we rounded up and killed thirty five penguins, but today, although there were a couple of hundred up, the weather was altogether too severe to hunt them.
The force of the wind was tremendous and a lot of valuable gear that had been carefully brought here was picked up by the wind and blown out to sea. I saw one of the large ten gallon aluminum cookers hurtling through the air and finally fell into the sea a long way out. A large number of socks, mitts and other small articles of clothing were thus lost, two or three ground sheets, a blanket, several pieces of wood and even some boots. Things were whisked out of people's hands and it was not safe to put a saucepan down for a minute. The sailors lost theirs in this way.
I had placed my Burberry blouse out to try and dry it, and had placed it on a rock with two heavy stones as large as my head on the top of it. Almost before I had turned around, a gust of wind whisked off both the stones and that was the last I saw of my blouse. Immediately after a large canvas boat cover flew past me and landed in the sea.
It will seem that we were very slack not to take steps then and there to obviate this, but the weather was so thick and the party so dead beat that so long as people had sufficient clothes on them they were indifferent as to what happened to the spare stuff outside. It was a great pity because there certainly was a lot of stuff lost of which we should later have been glad. It is worthy of note, however, that it was all quite carefully stowed and covered with a sail, but the wind seemed out for sport and to be able to pick out the things it wanted to play with from under the sail.
All the tents had been pitched well above high watermark though the sailors tent was nearest to the sea. Tonight we were visited by an abnormally high tide which compelled the sailors to hurriedly strike their tent as the tide threatened to inundate it. Simultaneously we were all called out and spent a wretched hour or so in the dark pulling the "Stancomb Wills" and "James Caird" up to the summit of the spit out of reach of the water. The sailors passed the rest of the night in the latter boat which was by now entirely decked over for her journey to South Georgia.
April, 1916. 23.
The blizzard has subsided but there is now very heavy snow and still a strong wind. The difference between the present conditions and a blizzard is not quite easy to define and, indeed, a blizzard is always an arbitrary standard. It is a matter of comparison with conditions prevailing at the locality. We do not usually term it a blizzard unless the air is thickly charged with snow powder and the wind is blowing at over 40 miles per hour.
The snow powder of a blizzard is mainly that which is picked up from the surface by the wind and whirled along in suspension. Falling snow and wind such as we have today produce rather more of a snow storm than a blizzard. Breathing is not interfered with in a snowstorm but in a blizzard it is sometimes nearly impossible to breath facing the wind, and even with one's back to the wind one is partly choked by the ice particles which fill the air exactly like dust in a dust storm.
It is much colder today.
The "James Caird" is now completed for Sir Ernest's latest venturesome undertaking.
The carpenter had contrived wonderfully with the very limited resources at hand. Amongst the very few spare pieces of wood that we had was a sledge that had been taken to pieces for convenience in sowing into the boat. With the two runners of this he made fore and aft pieces for the deck and then fixed pieces of 3 ply Venesta wood across from gunwale to gunwale and laid canvas over this.
The whole forms a really neat job and a square hatch has been introduced aft.
Although I would rather die than undertake such a journey. I think her crew should be able to keep fairly dry.
She has been strengthened in the hull by having the mast of the "Dudley Docker" lashed along her keel inside. In fact the other boats have been freely denuded to provide for her to the very best advantage.
Today the "Stancomb Wills" was turned upside down in the same way as the "Docker" in order to provide a residence for the sailors, and they all trooped into it like rabbits, and proceeded to make it as snug as possible. They used the remains of their tent to make a front wall with.
By this afternoon there was about six inches of snow all over everything. During a blizzard snow gets no chance to settle though it may run into big drifts and also penetrated into boxes and so on.
At 2 p.m. the sun came out and I was tempted to hang my bags out with a view to drying them a bit, but whilst I was employed upon the other work a sharp snow storm came on and before I could get them in they were half filled with snow. The moisture in it had meanwhile frozen and the bags were as stiff as boards. I shook out most of the snow but some got down into the base of the hairs and could not be eradicated, but I got the full benefit of it at night when they were, if possible, wetter than ever.
We have not been getting many seals yet. Two on the 21st inst. and a big one yesterday, all Weddells.
Shelter of some sort for all hands is imperative but how to achieve it has been a matter of much cogitation. The stones here are mostly rounded and therefore unsuitable for building and the only substance available for weatherproofing i.e. caulking the interstices between stones, is now snow and the mud-impregnated grit that forms the foreshore. The other alternative is to excavate and ice cave in the glacier slope at the shore end of the spit, and this was decided upon and commenced today. A spot was selected about sixty feet up the slope and a pick and shovel party set to work. The ice was extremely hard and slow progress was made, but by nightfall an excavation 6 ft. high by 3 ft. wide and 4 ft. deep had been made. I have seen artificial ice grottoes in the Swiss Glaciers made for the entertainment of tourists but never expected to have it live in one! Now we're going to, and glad of it too.
The "Caird" being ready for sea, Sir Ernest is only waiting for fair enough weather to launch her. At present there is far too much surf. The following have been selected to accompany him. Captain Worsley, Crean, the carpenter and the two sailors Vincent and McCarthy.
The distance is seven hundred and fifty miles in a straight line. The object of undertaking the journey is to obtain relief at the earliest possible moment. Bravo! brave leader.
May, 1916. 5.
Overcast. Temperature 31 degrees. Mild, slushy.
There were some cold penguins to skin. It was cold work. When freshly killed it is easy, almost agreeable, work executed as follows: lay the penguin on his back, slit him from his neck to his tail with a knife, insert the hand and withdraw the stomach and other "utensils" taking care not to break the gall bladder, before doing this the windpipe and gullet has to be cut by holding it with one hand and passing the knife up with the other. Next tear the skin apart at the breast and work it off the carcass and legs, articulating the wings with a knife and cutting the skin round at the leg joints just above the gut (the penguin has feathers right down to, but not on, its feet). The tail is then articulated at its root and by holding on to it and pulling whilst standing on the penguins feet it can be skinned off the back and head all in one operation like pilling off one's vest inside out. What remains looks rather like a skinned rabbit. The two sides of the breast are easily cut off and the legs articulated, these portions are stored in the snow and the hearts and livers are all put into a box where they freeze into a solid cake. The skins are laid out flat and stored for fuel, but when one comes to one's last bird for the day one generally uses the blubbery inside of the skin to wash some of the blood off one's hands and even gives one's face a good wipe, using the feather side as a towel to dry oneself with. The blubbery nature of the inside of the skin forms quite a passable soap, but our hands and faces are always so black that it doesn't make any perceptible difference.
We practically never wash now except for this and it is surprising how soon one becomes reconciled to this state of affairs.
The penguins usually come up from the sea about 3 p.m. They roost here and go off to sea the first thing in the morning to fish. It seems probable that it is mostly different birds that come up every day and as if they were making a passage from one spot to another and using this as a half way house for however many we kill, just about the same number come up the next day. Were it not so, we should soon exterminate them. Today as many as 118 came up and we secured them all.
Our daily routine is now as follows. Cook turns out at 7 a.m. and goes out to galley to cook steaks. The inside stove is lighted and water heated up on it for milk. As the pungent blubber fumes pervade the atmosphere we all get well inside our bags and cough oil 9:30 or 10:00 a.m. when the order comes to "lash up and snow" whereupon we turn out fully dressed all but our boots, which we put on at once, and the ground floor people roll up their bags and bundle them up on to the bags of the protesting occupants of the thwarts who, by this time are generally down on the floor.
Two"seat placers", told off daily in rotation, place the Venesta provision cases round in a rough circle amidst the execrations of the remainder on whose toes the cases fall. We sit down disconsolate and liverish until the cooks of groups ( the groups remain the same as the original tent's crews and are maintained owing to the necessity of dividing the food up into all the available receptacles) stumble in with their precious burdens. "Whacking out" these proceeds the old "whoseing" process being rigidly adhered to. This operation has to be carried out on the knees of one of the members of the group and the balancing of the pot and all the eight tin plates is matter of no little skill.
As breakfast proceeds tongues are gradually loosened just as used to be the case in the ship, which proves that the psychological reaction of food even under such circumstances of destitution as ours still persists. Breakfast over we go out, if fine enough, and do such works as may be required of us. Luncheon is ready at 12:45 p.m. Today we had boiled penguin's carcasses and they weren't at all bad, being boiled in sea water to salt them a bit. It is dangerous to use sea water too freely on account of the likelihood of dysentery occurring from the magnesium salts in solution.
About 2 p.m. we again go out and work or walk about to keep our bodies and especially our feet warm. It is unfortunate that we have only such a very short walk the length of the spit. It gets monotonous and the people one meets are always the same and all so dirty looking and the snow covered pebbles are difficult to walk on, but one gets too cold sitting in the hut and as there is only four feet of head room beneath the thwarts of the boats it gets very crampy. By 4 p.m. most of us are in the hut again and at 4:30 supper is served.
It invariably consists of stewed seal or penguin meat. At both luncheon and supper we have ice cold water as a beverage. It is always ice cold because of the necessity of economizing fuel and therefore having to put rather more ice into the pot than can possibly all be melted. Should the water be warm by any chance we add more ice to it in order to increase the amount of water to the utmost. We nearly all get thirst during the night and have a drink of water at midnight.
At 6 p.m., the "seats" are replaced in the centre of the hut for the cook to sleep on, bags are laid out, we get into them and chat or read if possible until 7:30 p.m. by which hour nearly every one is asleep. Some wrangle.
We sleep from 7:30 p.m. to 9 a.m., at least that is the time we have to spend in our bags and most of sonly wish we could sleep for all that long time for it is very wearying lying awake hour after hour as many of us do, thinking most of the time of how much better we might be off if only this - and only that and so on. Of course we ought really to be only too thankful that we are here at all after the peril and uncertainty of our life on the floe. Our only source of danger here is lack of food. I suppose Mr. Wild knows what he is doing all right but I certainly think that until we are certain of a stock enough to last all the winter we ought to economize more now; we could quite well do with rather less than we are having, at least I could; the penguin steaks at breakfast are huge. One would rather economize now than risk going short later on which may or may not the base. I have seen too much improvidence on this expedition, it is a well known characteristic of the Esquimaus, perhaps a polar climate engenders it in certain people, but I must say that in all polar books I have read the narrators lay stress on the expediency of laying in a proper store for the winter; thus Scott, Greeley, Nordenskiold, Amundsen, Campbell. Living from hand to mouth may suit some natures, not mine. Mr. Wild is evidently relying too much upon an early relief. It is counting your chickens before they've hatched.
An adult sea elephant spent an hour or two on a small floe in West Bay, not more than fifty yards from the shore but the pack was too intersected to permit of approaching it. Some could have done it with oars to bridge the gaps but Mr. Wild thought it too risky.
May, 1916. 12.
A nasty dump day with a mild easterly blizzard.
A good many paddies were caught. They seem very plentiful just now.
The ice foot proved too much for the penguins today. Large numbers landed on a rock which can be reached form the shore by a round about way. They inspected the route ashore, decided it was no good and turned back. I observed three batches do this and thinking later arrivals might be similarly deterred I crept round and lay in wait and, on another batch coming up, I cut off their retreat and compelled them to go ashore.
I was not so successful with a second batch, several eluding me, but I managed the third batch all night. In this way I coerced ashore 51 birds of which Wild considered 21 sufficient for our needs. I really have no patience with these methods and am at a loss to know what inspires them. It certainly is not due to humaneness. The situation is too critical to take such liberties. I dare say we shall get penguins as long as we have to stay here, but there is no guarantee that we shall and no advantage whatever in leaving it to chance.
The only expedition that has previously wintered in this neighbourhood (Bruce at the South Orkneys) report that the penguins all left at the end of April and if analogy is worth anything they may quite likely leave here soon too.
We have now let seven hundred birds slip through our fingers, if we ever go short we shall have only ourselves to blame. So we shall be under the painful necessity of killing them rather more regularly in future.
One wonders just why these birds visited us in such great quantities. Were they driven up from Graham's Land by the ice and are they "en passage" migrating to islands further west more free from ice?
May, 1916. 15.
A cold night followed by a calm day with a calm open sea. Ninety penguins came up and all were killed. Wild asked me, sarcastically, if I was satisfied. He seems to think that I am personally afraid of having to starve. This is not exactly the case, it is rather the whole party that I am concerned about. I should not like to see a repetition of the Greeley disaster, and upon my word, I think we are asking for it.
We are now burning nothing but penguin skins on our indoor stove and nearly all the cooking is being done on it. It requires about fifteen skins per day and it behooves us to get all the penguins we can if only for the value of their skins as fuel.
To burn them it is necessary to cut them into thin strips which are laid over the two cross bars of the stove. The heat of the burning oil on the bottom of the stove causes the oil to "render" from the strips of skin; it drops on to the heap of ash and debris at the bottom and in due course ignites and helps to render the oil our of the next two strips and so on. It is necessary to replenish the strips every five or ten minutes. We leave the feathers on the skins just as they are and being very oily there is no unpleasant smell such as burning feathers usually make. The fire is lighted by a few wood-shavings and splinters derived from the little wooden "sweet-boxes" in which every ten pieces of nut food are packed.
There are therefore ten of these wooden boxes in a case of 100 blocks of nut food or seventy of them in all and, as each box will light two fires we have enough to get our stove going for a period of four months at least. We could quite easily light the fire by pouring seal oil on to the ashes of the previous night and inserting a wick when the whole lot would soon be in a blaze, but as the wood is available and blubber scarce we use the former for the present.
We are fortunate in having a good supply of matches, but even if we had none we could easily manage to get a light, in the first instance, with a "burning glass" on one of our rare sunny days and thereafter maintain a constant flame night and day with a blubber lamp.
June, 1916. 15
Mild but wet. Temperature 31 degrees. I am tired of stating that the pack is still in; but it is.
Poor Blackborrow had to have his toes amputated today.
The doctors worked under difficulty.
We were all ordered outside except the doctors and Wild, who stayed as a privileged spectator and Hurley who has a reputation as a stoker and who therefore kept the fire going to maintain an equable temperature. He managed to get up and keep a temperature of 80 degrees for an hour, not so bad for the Antarctic, nothing but blubber and penguin skins for fuel.
As it was drizzling we all went and took shelter in one of the caves. It was pretty wet and damp there. We cut each other's hair to pass the time away and pretty good frights we made out ourselves. As we had to sit on a block of ice during the process, nothing else being available for a seat, we mostly got rather wet where our clothing came in contact with the ice.
The caves are now easily accessible owing to the icefoot having bridged the gap that formerly intercepted out approach.
They form very useful shelters and if only their floors were above high water level and they were on the East side of Penguin Hill they would be of great value to us as shelters for penguin-skinning and as storehouses. To reach them it is nearly always necessary to go right round Penguin Hill although the caves are not more than twenty yards from the hut, but the short cut is seldom negotiable, and when it is, it is only effected by the thin coating of ice adhering to very steep rock faces. Steps have been cut in this ice but a slip would entail a ducking in deep water.
It was nearly three hours before we were again able to get back into the hut by which time we were bored, cold and hungry.
The operation had been successful in spite of difficulties and when we got back into our cosy bags the patient was sleeping off the effects of the anaesthetic [sic].
June 1915, 19.
It is still mild but overcast again. A big swell bids fair to disperse the enveloping pack; open-water leads are increasing.
The nut-food sugar gamble is still rankling. I cannot help feeling I bear Wild a grudge and he no doubt feels contemptuous of me, even so it is better that we should give our emotions some rein than vegetate in mental torpor. As a matter of fact, Macklin agrees with me that we are none of us quite normal mentally owing to privation and improper nourishment.
I feel sure that had we been in possession of sufficient alcohol to make it a "swopable" commodity and had some members made a corner in it they would have revelled in their shrewdness and a reinstatement of rights would have been the last thing that they would have tolerated, but after all who am I that I should point the finger.
I find that my diary of impersonal impartiality is lately becoming inconveniently egoistic to the elimination of the more general affairs that really do matter, but I dare say the personal side of the case in the case of even only one person may have its uses.
I have another little bone to pick with Wild. Some weeks ago, as previously stated, in order no doubt to allay any uneasiness as to our future food supply Wild stated that we had ample meat to last us until the end of August. To anyone capable of simple calculation it was obvious that this was an over estimate and one could not help thinking that perhaps it was a case of "the wish being father of the thought", at any rate since then we have killed 300 penguins and 5 seals, and as far as I can estimate, (and I have had a good deal of experience now at estimating and calculating food supplied) we have no more than will last us until August 15th at the present rate of consumption. A large Weddell seal was lying for several hours on a small floe which drifted in to within 20 yards or so from the beach but unfortunately for want of a boat it never became accessible. It is very tantalizing to see so much prospective meat within one's gasp and yet to be unable to secure it.
July 1915, 19.
A moderate easterly blizzard confines us to our bags.
Both bays are full of close big lumpy pack.
On days like this we talk and talk. The principal topic is always food, good solid boiled suet puddings being generally voted as the things best worth living for, then apple and black currant puddings with cream, and then how new cake. I suppose it sounds beastly greedy to write like this but we are always in deadly earnest about it and
get quite heated over arguments as to whether muffins are more filling than crumpets. One has the sort of feeling that if a genie were to suddenly appear and offer us muffins or crumpets some idiot might go and say crumpets. I am a muffineer and know that the muffin is incomparably better food value that the crumpet. "Conspue"(?) the crumpet advocates!
We so seldom mention the war that it is hardly worth referring to it. I think we are all a little ashamed of having run away from it now that we find ourselves in this position of forced inertia, I know I am, and am most anxious to get back in time to do my bit. Most, though by no means all, of us think it must by over by now. I am one of those who think the contrary. If it is over it must have ended in a draw and Brittain could never tolerate that. Wordie is the best debater on this subject and sometimes gives us very interesting information as to pre-war conditions in Germany. For the rest, discussions on processes described in the Encyclopaedia, how things are done and made and semi-scientific talk fills the bill.
No poor penguins today.
July 1916, 25.
Mild and damp. West wind and snow.
We had quite an exciting incident today. A large pregnant female seal drifted quite close in on an ice-slab in West Bay at a place where there is a good ice-foot over the rocks but where Penguin Hill rises in an abrupt precipice. Wild came along with his little gun but failed to make his usual fine shooting and although he shot it three times in the head he did no kill it. As he had only three cartridges with him he sent Holness back tot he hut for some more.
To reach the hut it was necessary to go right round the foot of Penguin Hill a distance of some 300 yards over a difficult rocky path. Whilst Holness was away the seal so far recovered itself that it got its head and shoulder over the edge of the little floe and was about to dive when Holness arrived. It was an anxious moment for fear we might lose this valuable quantity of food. Wild then successfully dispatched it and it was decided to cut it up where it lay as soon as the floe drifted in close enough to gain access to it, and to haul it up the precipice by rope.
I had gone round the foot of Penguin Hill and had reached the top in order to give a had with the rope, but as I was immediately afterwards required down on the ice foot I had the pleasure of being lowered over the precipice on the end of the rope, and subsequently ascended by the same means.
The seal was cut up into four pieces and hauled up and the fully developed foetus which had only about two months to go was hauled up complete. We also got two penguins.
August 1916, 23.
No change in pack or weather.
Certain members are exhibiting obvious concerns about the present food shortage and strange to say now that there really is a shortage the imperturbable pessimists are apparently quite unconcerned and certainly are not saying anything in the nature of "We told you so." It is not unusual that pessimism and equanimity are counterparts.
The manner in which the aforesaid members exhibit their fears is in trying to overcome them assuming that the pessimists are now thoroughly scared and therefore making mocking remarks such as "Now we shall all starve" and "We shall have to eat the one who dies first" and so on, which has actually occurred before now when people have been in only very slightly worse straits than we are now. There's many a true word said in jest. To a close observer there are many other indications in the way that the fatuous optimists shout loudly to each other all manner of such remarks about the food supply question as if to keep their spirits up by the cheery loudness of their voices in much the same way psych-ologically as Chinese walking along a road at night shout loudly to each other to keep off evil spirits in other words fear by mutual encouragement.
Of course the probability is that we have ample to support us until the pack clears off again, for it has now been in for a week and the longest previous spell has been 13 days only, but when it does clear we shall have no reserve left and, should we be based again within a few days for a more we should be in a bad way.
I had gone round the foot of Penguin Hill and had reached the top in order to give a had with the rope, but as I was immediately afterwards required down on the ice foot I had the pleasure of being lowered over the precipice on the end of the rope, and subsequently ascended by the same means.
By Thomas Orde-Lees, Quartermaster
